First published in Great Britain by Y3eorge Allen & Unwin Ltd. in 1948
Second edition, ninth T ion 1970

First Indian reprint by George Allen & Unwin (India) Pyivate Ltd. 1971

 

This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. All rights are reserved.

Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study, research, criti-

cism or review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a re-

trieval system, or transmitted, in any form by any means, electronic, electrical,

chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without

the prior permission of the copyright owner. Enquiries should be addressed
to the publishers,

George Allen & Unwin (India) Private Ltd.
Represented in India by Blackie & Son (India) Ltd.
103/5 Fort Street, Bombay 1
285/J Bipin Behari Ganguly Street, Calcutta 12
Bharat Buildings, 2/18 Mount Road, Madras 2
4/21-22B, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 1

. PRINTED IN INDIA
BY S.M. BALSAVER AT USHA” PRINTERS 6 TULLOCH ROAD, BOMBAY 1, AND
PUBLISHED BY D.R. BHAGI FOR GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN (INDIA) PRIVATE LTD.,
103/5 FORT STREET, BOMBAY 1.To
Mahatma GandhiPREFACE

War and post-war periods tend to~bring into prominence
the value of sciences, especially their practical applications.
These are important for the conduct of wars andsthe comfort
of citizens in peace. But if we have to give largeness and
wisdom to men’s outlook on life, we should lay stress on
humanities also, The relation of sciences to humanities
may be stated roughly to be one of means to ends, In our
enthusiasm for the means we should not overlook the ends.
The concepts of right and wrong do not belong to the sphere
of science; yet it is, on the study of the ideas centring round
these concepts, that human action and happiness ultimately
depend. A balanced culture should bring the two great
halves into harmony. The Bhagavadgita is a valuable aid
for the understanding of the supreme ends of life.

There are many editions of the Bhagavadgita and several
good English translations of it and there would be no justi-
fication for another, if all that was needed for English readers
was a bare translation. Those who read the Gila in English
need notes at least as muchas those who read it in Sanskrit,
if they are not to miss their way in it. The classical com-
mentaries indicate to us what the Gitd meant to the com-
mentators and their contemporaries. Every scripture has
two sides, one temporary and perishable, belonging to the
ideas of the people of the period and the country in which
it is produced, and the other eternal and imperishable, and
applicable to all ages and countries. The intellectual expres-
sion and the psychological idiom are the products of time
while the permanent truths are capable of being lived and
seen by a higher than intellectual vision at all times. The
vitality of a classic consists in its power to produce from
time to time men who confirm and correct from their own
experience truths enunciated in it. The commentators speak
to us from experience and express in a new form, a form
relevant to their age and responsive to its needs, the ancient
wisdom of the scripture. All great doctrine, as it is repeated
in the course of centuries, is coloured by the reflections of
the age in which it appears and bears the imprint of the
individual who restates it. Our times are different; our habits
of thought, the mental background to which we relate our
experience, are not quite the same as those of the classical
commentators. The chief problem facing us today is thePreface 7

reconciliation of mankind. The Gia is specially suited for
the purpose, as it attempts to reconcile varied and apparently
antithetical forms of the religious consciousness and em-
phasizes the*root conceptions of religion which are neither
ancient nor modern but eternal and belong to the very flesh
of humanity, past, present and future. History poses our
problems, and if we restate old principles in new ways, it is
not because we will to do so but because we must. Such a
restatement of the truths of eternity in the accents of our
time is the only way in which a great scripture can be of
living value to mankind. From this point of view, thegeneral
Introduction and the Notes may perhaps be found useful
by the intelligent reader. There are many points in the
detailed interpretations of the Gzia where there are differences
among scholars. I have not done more than call attention
to them in the Notes as the book is intended for the general
reader who wishes to enlarge his spiritual environment rather
than for the specialist.

A translation to serve its purpose must be as clear as its
substance will permit. It must be readable without being
shallow, modern without being unsympathetic. But no trans-
lation of the Gita can bring out the dignity and grace of the
original. Its melody and magic of phrase are difficult to
recapture in another medium. The translator’s anxiety is to
render the thought, but he cannot convey fully the spirit.
He cannot evoke in the reader the mood in which the thought
was born and induce in him the ecstacy of the seer and the
vision he beholds. Realizing that, for me at any rate, it is
difficult to bring out, through the medium of English, the
dignity of phrase and the intensity of utterance, I have given
the text in Roman script also so that those who know
Sanskrit can rise to a full comprehension of the meaning
of the Gita by pondering over the Sanskrit original. Those
who do not know Sanskrit will get a fairly correct idea of
the spirit of the poem from the beautiful English rendering
by Sir Edwin Arnold. It is so full of ease and grace and has
a flavour of its own which makes it acceptable to all but
those who are scrupulous about scholarly accuracy.

I am much indebted to Professor M. Hiriyanna who read
the typescript and Professor Franklin Edgerton who read
the proofs for their valuable advice and help. SRPREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

Tr is a pleasure to know that a second edition is called for and
this has enabled me to correct many misprints and profit by the
suggestions made by my friend Professor F. W. Thomas to
whom I am greatly indebted.

Ss. R.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Bhagavadgita Gita or B.G.
Indian Philosophy by Radhakrishnan LP.
Mahabharata MB.
Sathkara Ss.

Sarhkara’s Commentary on the Brahma Siitra S.B.
Sarhkara’s Commentary on the Bhagavadgita S.B.G.
Rimainuja R

Upanisad Up.CHAPTER

IL
Itt.
Iv.
Vv.
VI.
VIL.
VUI.
Ix.

Xi.
XIL

XII
XIV.
XV.
XVI.
XVI.

XVIIL

CONTENTS

Proface

List of Abbreviations

The Bhagavadgita

Introductory Essay

The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna
Sarhkhya Theory and Yoga Practice
Karma Yoga or the Method of Work
The Way of Knowledge

True Renunciation

The True Yoga

God and the World

The Course of Cosmic Evolution
The Lord is more than His Creation

God is the Source of All; to know Him is to
know All

The Lord’s Transfiguration

Worship of the Personal Lord is better than
Meditation of the Absolute

The Body called the Field, the Soul called the
Knower of the Field and Discrimination
between Them

The Mystical Father of All Beings

The Tree of Life

The Nature of the Godlike and the Demoniac
Mind

The Three Modes applied to Relyious
Phenomena

Conclusion

Bibliography

Index

PAGE

ro
Ir

79

98
131
I5I
174
187
212
226
237
256

269

290
300
314
326
334
342
351

384
385THE BHAGAVADGITA

Taught by the blessed Narayana Himself to Arjuna, com-
piled by Vyasa, the ancient seer, in the middle of the
Mahabharata, I meditate on Thee, O Mother, O Bhagavadgita,
the blessed, of eighteen chapters, the bestower of the nectar
of non-dualistic wisdom, the destroyer of rebirth.t

“This famous Gitasastra is an epitome of the essentials
of the whole Vedic teaching. A knowledge of its teaching
leads to the realization of all human aspirations.”

“J find a solace in the Bhagavadgita that I miss even in
the Sermon on the Mount. When disappointment stares me
in the face and all alone I see not one ray of light, I go back
to the Bhagavadgita. I find a verse here and a verse there
and I immediately begin to smile in the midst of overwhelm-
ing tragedies—and my life has been full of external tragedies
—and if they have left no visible, no indelible scar on me,
I owe it all to the teachings of the Bhagavadgita.” M. K.
Gandhi, Young India (1925), pp. 1078-1079.

1 gush parthaya pratibodhitam bhagavata navdyanena svayan
vydisena grathilam puranamunina madhyemahabharatam
advaitamytavarsinim bhagavatim astadasadhyayinim
amba tudm anusandadhami bhagavadgite bhavadvesinim.

2 samastavedarthasarasamgrahabhitam.,.samasiapurusarthasiddhim,

S.B.G. Introduction.INTRODUCTORY ESSAY

1. Importance of the Work

The Bhagavadgiia is more a religious classic than a philo-
sophical treatise. It is not an esoteric work designed for and
understood by the specially initiated but a popular poem
which helps even those ‘‘who wander in the region of the
many and variable.” It gives utterance to the aspirations
of the pilgrims of all sects who seek to tread the inner way
to the city of God. We touch reality most deeply, where men
struggle, fail and triumph. Millions of Hindus,* for centuries,
have found comfort in this great book which sets forth in
precise and penetrating words the essential principles of a
spiritual religion which are not contingent on ill-founded facts,
unscientific dogmas or arbitrary fancies. With a long history

1 The Gita has exercised an influence that extended in early times
to China and Japan and latterly to the lands of the West. The two
chief works of Mahayana Buddhism, Mahayanasraddhotpatti (The
Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana) and Saddharmapundarika
(The Lotus of the True Law) are deeply indebted to the teaching
of the Gita. It is interesting to observe that the official exponent
of “the German Faith,” J. W. Hauer, a Sanskrit scholar who served
for some years as a missionary in India, gives to the Gita a central
place in the German faith. He calls it ‘‘a work of imperishable
Significance.” He declares that the book “gives us not only profound
insights that are valid for all times and for all religious life, but it
contains as well the classical presentation of one of the most sg-
nificant phases of Indo-Germanic religious history. . . . It shows
us the way as regards the essential nature and basal characteristic
of Indo-Germanic religion. Here Spirit is at work that belongs to
our spirit.” He states the central message of the Gita in these wards:
“‘We are not called to solve the meaning of life but to find out’ the
Deed demanded of us and to work and so, by action, to master the
riddle of life.” (Quoted in the Hibbert Journal, April 1940, p. 341.)
The Gita, however, bases its message Of action on a philosophy of
life. It requires us to know the meaning of life before we engage
in action. It does not advocate a fanatical devotion to the practical
to the disparagement of the dignity of thought. Its philosophy of
the practical is a derivative from its philosophy of spirit, brakmvidyd-
ntargatakarmayogasastra, Ethical action is derived from metaphysical
realization. S. urges that the essential purpose of the Gi#d is to teach
us a way out of bondage and not merely enjoin action, sokamohadi-
samsdrakarmanivrtivartham gitasdstram, na pravartakam.(i The Bhagavadgtta

of spiritual power, it’serves even today as a light to all who
will receive illumination from the. profundity of its wisdom
which insists on a world wider and deeper than wars and
revolutions can touch. It is a powerful shaping factor in the
renewal of spiritual life and has secured an assured place
among the world’s great scriptures.

The teaching of the Gifa is not presented as a metaphysical
system thought out by an individual thinker or school of
thinkers. It is set forth as a tradition which has emerged
from the religious life of mankind. It is articulated by a
profound seer who sees truth in its many-sidedness and
beliaves in its saving power. It represents not any sect of
Hinduism but Hinduism as a whole, not merely Hinduism
but religion as such, in its universality, without limit of time
or space,t embracing within its synthesis the whole gamut
of the human spirit, from the crude fetishism of the savage
to the creative affirmations of the saint. The suggestions set
forth in the Gita about the meaning and value of existence,
the serse of eternal values and the way in which the ultimate
mysteries are illumined by the light of reason and moral
intuition provide the basis for agreement in mind and spirit
so very essential for keeping together the world which has
become materially one by the universal acceptance of the
externals of civilization.

‘As the colophon indicates, the Bhagavadgita is both meta-
physics and ethics, brahmavidya and yogasasiva, the science
of reality and the art of union with reality. The truths of
spirit can be apprehended only by those who prepare them-
selves for their reception by rigorous discipline. We must
cleanse the mind of all distraction and purge the heart from
all corruption, to acquire spiritual wisdom.? Again, the

* Cp. Aldous Huxley: “The Gita is one of the clearest and most
comprehensive summaries of the Perennial Philosophy ever to have
been made. Hence its enduring value, not only for Indians, but for
all mankind. .. . The Bhagavadgita is perhaps the most systematic
spiritual statement of the Perennial Philosophy.” Introduction to
the Bhagavadgitaé by Svami Irabhavananda and Christopher
Isherwood (1945).

2 Cp. jyotir atmani nanyatra samarit tat sarvajantusu
svayam ca sahy te dvastuit susamahitacetasa.

“God’s light dwells in the self and nowhere else. It shines alike
in every living being and one can sce it with one’s mind steadied.”Introductory Essay ‘ 13,

perception of the truth'results in the renewal of life. The
realm of spirit is not cut off from the realm of life. To divide
man into outer desire and inner quality is to violate the
integrity of human life. The illumined soul acts as a member
of the kingdom of God, affecting the world he touches and
becoming a saviour to others.t The two orders of reality,
the transcendent and the empirical, are closely related. The
opening section of the Gita raises the question of the
problem of human action. How can we live in the Highest
Self and yet continue to work in the world? The answer
given is the traditional answer of the Hindu religion, though
it is stated with a new emphasis. .

By its official designation, the Gia is called an upanisad,
since it derives its main inspiration from that remarkable
group of scriptures, the Upanisads. Though the Gita gives us
a vision of truth, impressive and profound, though it opens
up new paths for the mind of man, it accepts assumptions
which are a part of the tradition of past generations and
embedded in the language it employs. It crystallizes and
concentrates the thoughts and feelings which were developing
among the thinking people of its time. The fratricidal struggle
is made the occasion for the development of a spiritual
message based on the ancient wisdom, prajfa purdni, of the
Upanisads.3 ‘ :

The different elements which, at the period of the com-
position of the Gia, were competing with each other within
the Hindu system, are brought together and integrated into
a comprehensive synthesis, free and large, subtle and pro-
found. The teacher refines and reconciles the different cur-
rents of thought, the Vedic cult of sacrifice, the Upanisad
teaching of the transcendent Brahman, the Bhagavata theism
and tender piety, the Sarhkhya dualism and the Yoga

1 IV, 34.

+ Cp. the colophon: bhagavadgitasu upanisatsu.

3 The popular verse from the Vaisnaviya Tantrasara makes out
that’ the Gita restates the central teachings of the Upanisads. The
Upanisads are the cows and the cowherd’s son, Krsna, is the milker;
Arjuna is the calf, the wise man is the drinker and the nectar-like
git is the excellent milk.

sarvopanisado gavo dogdha gopalanandanah
partho vaisah sudhir bhoktE dugdharh gitamrtark mahat,14 The Bhagavadgita

meditation. He draws all these living elements of Hindu
life and thought into an organic unity. He adopts the method,
not of denial but of penetration and shows how these different
lines of thought converge towards the same ends

2. Date and Text

The Bhagavadgita is later than the great movement repre-
sented by the early Upanisads and earlier than the period
of the development of the philosophic systems and their
formulation in siitras. From its archaic constructions and
internal references, we may infer that it is definitely a work
of the pre-Christian era. Its date may be assigned to the
fifth century B.c., though the text may have received many
alterations in subsequent times.:

‘We do not know the name of the-author of the Gita.
Almost all the books belonging to the early literature of
India are anonymous. The authorship of the G##a is attributed
to Vyasa, the legendary compiler of the Mahabharata. The
eighteen chapters of the Gité form Chapters XXIII to XL
of the Bhismaparvan of the Mahabharata.

It is argued that the teacher, Krsna, could not have recited
the seven hundred verses to Arjuna on the battlefield. He
must have said a- few pointed things which were later
elaborated by the narrator into an extensive work, According
to Garbe, the Bhagavadgita was originally a Sarnkhya-yoga
treatise with which the Krgna-Vasudeva cult got mixed up
and in the third century B.c. it became adjusted to the
Vedic tradition by the identification of Krsna with Visnu.
The original work arose about 200 B.c. and it was worked
into its present form by some follower of the Vedanta in
the second century A.D. Garbe’s theory is generally rejected.
Hopkins regards the work as “‘at present a Krsnaite version
of an older Visnuite poem and this in turn was at first an
unsectarian work, perhaps a late Upanisad.”2 Holtzmann

1 LP., Vol. I, pp. 522-5.

3 Religions of india (1908), p. 389. Farquhar writes of it as “‘an
old verse Upanisad, written rather later than the Svet@Svatara, and
worked up into the Gi/d in the interests of Krsnaism by a poet after
the Christian era.’ Outline of the Religious Literature of India (1920),
Sec. 95.Introductory Essay 15

looks upon the Giié es a Visnuite remodelling of a pan-
theistic poem. Keith believes that it was o' ly an
Upanisad of the Svetasvatara type but was later adapted
to Phe cult vf Krsna. Barnett tninks that different streams
of tradition became confused in the mind of the author.
Rudolf Otto affirms that the original Gita was “a splendid
epic fragment and did not include any doctrinal literature.”
It was Krsna’s intention “‘not to proclaim any transcendent
dogma of salvation but to render him (Arjuna) willing to
undertake the special service of the Almighty will of the
God who decides the fate of battles.”’: Otto believes that the
doctrinal treatises are interpolated. In this he is in agree-
ment with Jacobi who also holds that the original nucleus
was elaborated by the scholiasts into its present form.

These different opinions seem to arise from the fact that,
in the Gia, are united currents of philosophical and religious .
thought diffused along many and devious courses. Many
apparently conflicting beliefs are worked into a simple unity
to meet the needs of the time, in the true Hindu spirit, that
over all of them broods the grace of God. The question
whether the Gia succeeds in reconciling the different ten-
dencies of thought will have to be answered by each reader
for himself after he completes the study of the book. The
Indian tradition has always felt that the apparently incon-
gruous elements were fused together ih the mind of the
author and that the brilliant synthesis he suggests and
illuminates, though he does not argue and prove it in detail,
fosters the true life of spirit.

For our purposes, we may adopt the text followed by
Sarhkara in his commentary as it is the oldest extant com-
mentary on the poem.?

3. Chief Commentators

The Gita has been recognized for centuries as an orthodox
scripture of the Hindu religion possessing equal authority
with the Upanisads and the Brahma Sitra and the three

* The Orginal Gita: E.T. (1939), pp. 12, 14.
2 The few variations of the text which we find in the Kashmir

Rescension do not affect the general teaching of the Gifd. See F. A.

Schrader: The Kashmir Rescension of the Bhagavadgita (1930).16 The Bhagavadgita

together form the triple canon (prasthdna-traya). The teachers
of the Vedanta are obliged to justify their special doctrines
by an appeal to these three authorities and so wrote com-
mentaries on them expounding how the texts*teach their
special points of view. The Upanisads contain many different
suggestions about the nature of the Absolute and Its relation
to the world. The Brahma Siltra is so terse and obscure that
it has been used to yield a variety of interpretations. The
Gita gives a more consistent view and the task of the com-
mentators, who wish to interpret the texts to their own
ends, becomes more difficult. After the decline of Buddhism
in India, different sects arose, the chief being Advaita or
non-dualism, Vigistadvaita ot,qualified non-dualism, Dvaita
or dualism and Suddhadvaita or pure non-dualism. The
various commentaries on the Gita were written by the teachers
in support of their own traditions (sampraddya) and in refuta-
tion of those of others, These writers are able to find in the
Gita their own systems of religious thought and metaphysics,
since the author of the Gita suggests that the one eternal
truth which we are seeking, from which all other truth
derives, cannot be shut up in a single formula‘_Again, we
receive from the study and reflection of the scripture as
much living truth and spiritual influence as we are capable
-of receiving.

The commentary of Sarhkara (A.D. 788-820) is the most
ancient of the existing ones. There were other commentaries
older than his, to which he refers in his Introduction, but
they have not come down to us.t Sarhkara affirms that
Reality or Brahman is one without a second. The entire
world of manifestation and multiplicity is not real in itself
and seems to be real only for those who live in ignorance
(avidya). To be caught in it is the bondage in which we are
all implicated. This lost condition cannot be removed by our
efforts. Works are vain and bind us firmly to this unreal
cosmic process (sathsara), the endless chain of cause and

: Knandagiri in his comment on S.B.G., II, 10, says that the
Vrttikara, who wrote a voluminous commentary on the Brahma
Sittra also wrote a Vrtti or gloss on the Gila urging that neither
knowledge (jfiina) nor action (karma) by itself leads to spintual
freedom and a combined pursuit of them takes us to the goal.Introductory Essay 7

effect. Only the wisdom that the universal reality and the
individual self are identical can bring us redemption. When
this wisdom arises, the ego is dissolved, the wandering
ceases and we have perfect joy and blessedness.

Brahman is definable only in terms of being. As It is above
all predicates, especially all distinctions of subject, object
and the act of cognition, It cannot be regarded as personal
and there can be no love or reverence for It.

Sarhkara holds that while action is essential as a means
for the purification of the mind, when wisdom is attained
action falls away. Wisdom and action are mutually opposed
as light and darkness.* He rejects the view of jAdnakarma-
samuccaya? He believes that Vedic rites are meant for
those who are lost in ignorance and desire.3 The aspirants
for salvation should renounce the performance of ritual
works.’ The aim of the Gita, according to Sarnkara, is the
complete suppression of the world of becoming: in which all
action.occurs, though his own life is an illustration of activity
carried on, after the attainment of wisdom

Sarhkara’s views are developed by Anandagiri, who is
probably as late as the thirteenth century, Sridhara
(a.D. 1400) and Madhusiidana (sixteenth century), among
others. The Maratha saints, Tukaram and Jfianesvar,
are great devotees thcugh they accept the position of
Sarnkara in metaphysics.

Ramanuja (eleventh century A.D.), in his commentary,
refutes the doctrine of the unreality of the world and the
path.of renunciation of action. He follows the interpretation
given by Yamunicarya in his Gitarthasamgraha. Brahman,
the highest reality, is Spirit, but not without attributes. He
has selfctonsciousness with knowledge of Himself and a
conscious will to create the world and bestow salvation on

2 IN, 37; IV, 33.

2 dasmad gitasu kevalad eva tattuajaandn moksapraptih, na karma-
samuccitat. S.B.G., II, 11. Even if karma may not be the immediate
cause of liberation, still it is a necessary means for acquiring saving
wisdom. §. admits it: “karmanisthayd sidnanisthapraptihetutvena
purusarthahetutvam na svdtantryena,”

3 avidyakamavata eva sarvani srautadini darsitani.

4 gitasastrasya prayojanam para nihgreyasam, ‘sahetuhasya
samsarasya atyantoparamalaksanam. S.B.G., Introduction.18 The Bhagavadgita

His creatures, He is the sum of all ideal predicates, infinite
and eternal, before and above all worlds, without any second.
The Vedic gods are His servants created by Him and
appointed in their places to perform their ordained duties.
The world is no deception or illusion but is genuine and
real. The world and God are one as body and soul are one.
They are a whole but at the same time unchangeably dif-
ferent. Before creation, the world is in a potential form,
undeveloped into the existing and diversified manifestations.
In creation, it ‘s developed into name and form (namariipa).
By representing the world as the body of God, it is suggested
that the world is not made from something alien, a second
principle but is produced by the Supreme out of His own
nature. God is both the instrumental and the material cause
of the world. The analogy of soul and body is used to indicate
the absolute dependence of the world on God even as the
body is absolutely dependent on the soul. The world is
not only the body of God but His remainder, #Svarasyasesa,
and this phrase suggests the complete dependence and
contingency of the world. .

All consciousness presupposes a subject and an object
which is different from consciousness which is regarded by
R&manuja as a dependent substance (dharmabhiitadravya),
capable of streaming out. The ego (jiva) is not unreal and
is not extinguished in the state of liberation. The Upanisad
passage, tat tvam asi, ‘‘that art thou,” means that “God is
my self’ even as my soul is the self of my body. God is the
supporting, controlling principle of the soul, even as the soul
is the supporting principle of the body. God and soul are one,
not because the two are identical byt because God indwells
and penetrates the soul. He is the inner guide, antaryamin,
who dwells deep within the soul and as such is the principle
of its life. Immanence, however, is not identity. In time as
well as in eternity, the creature remains distinct from the
Creator.

“Ramanuja develops in his commentary on the Gita a type
of personal mysticism. In the secret places of the human
soul, God dwells but He is unrecognized by it so long as the
soul does not acquire the redeeming knowledge. We acquire
this knowledge by serving God with our whole heart andIntroductory Essay 19

soul. Perfect trust is possible only for those who are elected
by divine grace. Ramanuja admits that the paths of know-
ledge, devotion and action are all mentioned in the Gita,
but he holds that its main emphasis is on devotion. The
wretchedness of sin, the deep longing for the Divine, the
intense feeling of trust and faith in God’s all-conquering
love, the experience of being divinely elected are stressed
by him.

The Supreme is Visnu, for Ramanuja. He is the only true
god who will not share His divine honours with others.
Liberation is service of and fellowship with God in Vaikuntha
or heaven.

Madhva (A.D. 1199 to 1276) wrote two works on the
Bhagavadgita, called the Gitabhdsya and Gitatatparya. He

empts to derive from the Gita tenets of dualistic (dvaita)
Philosophy. It is self-contradictory, he contends, to look
upon the soul as identical with the Supreme in one sense and
different from Him in another. The two must be regarded as
eternally different from each other and any unity between
them, partial or entire, is untenable. He interprets the passage
“that art thou” as meaning that we must give up the dis-
tinction between mine and thine, and hold that everything is
subject to the control of God.t Madhva contends that devo-
tion is the method emphasized in the Gita.

“Nimbarka (a.D. 1162) adopts the theory of dvaitadvaita
(dual-non-dual doctrine). He wrote on Brahma Sitra and his
disciple KeSavakasmirin wrote a commentary on the Gia
called, Tattuaprakasika. Nimbirka holds that the soul (jiva),
the world (jagat) and God are different from each other;
yet the existence and activity of the soul and the world
depend on the will of God.: Devotion to the Supreme is the
principal theme of Nimbarka’s writings.

» Vallabha (A.D. 1479) develops what is called suddhadvaita
or-pure non-dualism. The ego (jiva) when pure and unblinded
by illusions and the Supreme Brahman are one. Souls are
particles of God like sparks of fire and they cannot acquire
the knowledge necessary for obtaining release except by the
grace of the Supreme. Devotion to God is the most important
sa inttiyark tadlyam at bhedam apahdya sarvam tvaradhinam iti

iti20 The Bhagavadgtta
means of obtaining release. Bhakti is truth associated with
love.*

There have been several other commentators on the Gita
and in our own time, the chief are B.:G. Tilak and Sri
Aurobindo. Gandhi has his own views. .

The differences of interpretation are. generally held to be
differences determined by the view-point adopted. The Hindu
tradition believes that the different views are complemen-
tary. Even the systems of Indian philosophy are so many
points of view or darganas which are mutually complemen-
tary and not contradictory. The Bhadgavata says that the
sages have described in various ways the essential truths.>
A popular verse declares: “From the view-point of the body,
I am Thy servant, from the view-point of the ego, I am a
portion of Thee; from the view-point of the self I am Thyself.
This is my conviction.”3 God is experienced as Thou or I
according to the plane in which consciousness centres.

4. Ultimate Reality

The Gita does not give any arguments in support of its
metaphysical position. The reality of the Supreme is not
a question to be solved by a dialectic which the vast majority
of the human race will be unable to understand. Dialectic
in itself and without reference to personal experience cannot
give us conviction. Only spiritual experience can provide
us with proofs of the existence of Spirit.

The Upanisads affirm the reality of a Supreme Brahman,
one without a second, without attributes or determinations,
who is identical with the deepest self of man. Spiritual
experience centres round a sovereign unity which overcomes
the duality between the known and the knowing. The in-
ability to conceptualize the experience leads to such descrip-
tions as identity, pure and simple. Brahman, the subsistent
simplicity, is its own object in an intuition which is its very

1 premalaksana Svaddha. Amrtatarangini.
2 “iti nandprasamkhyanarh tattvanam kavibhih kytam.”
3 dehabuddhya tu daso’harn jivabuddhya tvad arhSakah:
Gtmabuddhya tvam evaham iti me nigcutd mati.
See also Anandagiri: Samkaradiguijaya.Introductory Essay ar

being. It is the pure subject whose existence cannot be
ejected into the external or objective world.

Strictly speaking we cannot give any description of
Brahman. The austerity of silence is the only way in which
we can bring out the inadequacy of our halting descriptions
and imperfect standards. The Brhadaranyaka Up. says:
“Where everything indeed has become the Self itself, whom.
and by what should one think? By what can we know the
universal knower ?’’2 The duality between knowing and know-
able characteristic of discursive thought is transcended. The
Eternal One is so infinitely real that we dare not even give
It the name of One since oneness is an idea derived from
worldly experience (yyavahara). We can only speak of It as
the non-dual, advaita,3 that which is known when all duali-
ties are resolved in the Supreme Identity. The Upanisads
indulge in negative accounts, that the Real is not this, not
this (na iti, na iti), “‘without sinews, without scar, untouched
by evil,’ ‘‘without either shadow or darkness, without a

« Cp. Lao Tze: “The Tao which can be named is not the true Tao.”’
“The reality of the formless, the unreality of that which has form—
is known to all. Those who are on the road to attainment care not
for these things, but the people at large discuss them. Attainment
implies non-discussion; discussion implies non-attainment. Mani-
fested Tao has no objective value; hence silence is better than
argument. It cannot be translated into speech; better, then, say
nothing at all. This is called the great attainment.” Soothill: The
Three Religions of China, second edition (1923), pp. 56-7. The
Buddha maintained a calm silence when he was questioned about
the nature of reality and nirvana. Jesus maintained a similar silence
when Pontius Pilate questioned him as to the nature of truth.

Cp. Plotinus: “If any one were to demand of nature why it
produces, it would answer, if it were willing to listen and speak:
You should not ask questions, but understand keeping silence as
I keep silence, for I am not in the habit of speaking.”

a IL, 4, 12-14.

3 Cp. Kularnava Tantra.

advaitam kecid icchanti duaitam icchanti ci’pare
mama tativam vijananto dvaitadvaita vivarjitam.
Some editions read for vijanantah, na jananti.

«Isa Up., 8 The Supreme, tad ekam, is without qualities and
attributes, “neither existent nor non-existent.” Rg. Veda, X, 129.
The Madhyamika Buddhists call the Ultimate Reality void or sinya,
lest by giving it any other name they may be betrayed into limiting
it. For them it is that which shall be known when all oppositions
are resolved in the Supreme Identity. Cp. St. John of Damascus:22 The Bhagavadgita

within or a without.”! The Bhagavadgita supports this view
of the Upanisads in many passages. The Supreme is said to
be “unmanifest, unthinkable and unchanging,”? “neither
existent nor nonexistent.”’3 Contradictory predécates are at-
tributed to the Supreme to indicate the inapplicability of
empirical determinations. ‘‘It does not move and yet it
moves, It is far away and yet it is near.’”’4 These predicates
bring out the twofold nature of the Supreme as being and
as becoming. He is para or transcendent and apara or
immanent, both inside and outside the world.s

The impersonality of the Absolute is not its whole sig-
nificance. The Upanisads support Divine activity and par-
ticipation in nature and give us a God who exceeds the mere
infinite and the mere finite. The interest which inspired
Plato’s instruction to the astronomers of the Academy ‘‘to
save the appearances,” made the seers of the Upanisads
look upon the world as meaningful. In the words of the
Tatttiriya Up., the Supreme is that ‘‘from which these beings
are born, that by which they live and that into which, when
departing, they enter.” According to the Veda, ‘‘He is the
God who is in fire, in water, who pervades the entire universe;
He who is in plants, in trees, to Him we make our obeisance

“It is impossible to say what God is in Himself and it is more exact
to speak of Him by excluding everything. Indeed He is nothing
of that which is. . . above being itself.”

' Brhadavanyaka Up., II, 8, 8. In the M.B. the Lord who is
the teacher tells Narada that His real form is “invisible, unsmellable,
untouchable, quality-less, devoid of parts, unborn, ‘eternal, per-
manent and actionless.” See Santiparva, 339, 21-38. It is the “cloud
of unknowing” or what the Areopagite calls the “superluminous
darkness,” “the silent desert of the divinity . . . who is properly no
being” in the words of Eckhart. Cp. Angelus Silesius: “God is mere
nothing . , . to Him belongs neither now nor here.” Cp. also Plotinus:
“Generative of all, the Unity is none of all, neither thing nor
quality, nor intellect nor soul, not in motion, not at rest, not in
place, not in time; it is the self-defined, unique in form or, better,
formless, existing before Form was or Movement or Rest, all of
which are attachments of Being and make Being the manifold it is.”
(Enneads, E.T., by Mackenna, VI, 9.)

2 IL, 25. 3 XIII, 12; XIII, 15-17.

4 Ika Up., 5: see also Mundaka Up., II, 1, 6-8; Katha Up., Il, 14;
Brhadaranyaka Up., 11, 37; Svetasvatara Up., III, 17.

5 bahir antas ca bhitandm, XII, 15.Introductory Essay 23

in and again,”’! ‘Who would have exerted, who would
have lived, if this supreme bliss had not been in the
heavens?’’s The theistic emphasis becomes prominent in the
Svetdsvatara"U>p. ‘“He, who is one*and without any colour
(visible form), by the manifold wielding of His power, ordains
many colours (forms) with a concealed purpose and into
whom, i in the beginning and the end, the universe dissolves,
He is the God. May He endow us with an understanding
which leads to good actions.”3 Again ‘Thou art the woman,
thou art the man; thou art the youth and also the maiden;
thou as an old man totterest with a stick, being born. Thou
art facing all directions,’”’4 Again, “‘His form is not capdble
of being seen; with the eye no one sees Him. They who
know Him thus with the heart, with the mind, as abiding
in the heart, become immortal.”s He is a universal God who
Himself is the universe which He includes within His own
being. He is the light within us, hrdyantar jyotih. He is the
Supreme whose shadow is life and death.6

In the Upanisads, we have the account of the Supreme
as the Immutable and the Unthinkable as also the view that
He is the Lord of the universe. Though He is the source of
all that is, He is Himself unmoved for ever.7 The Eternal
Reality not only supports existence but is also the active
power in the world. God is both transcendent, dwelling in
light inaccessible and yet in Augustine’s phrase ‘‘more
intimate to the soul than the soul to itself.” The Upanisad
speaks of two birds perched on one tree, one of whom eats
the fruits and the other eats not but watches, the silent
witness withdrawn from enjoyment! Impersonality and

1 yo devo'gnau yo'psu yo visvar bhuvanam avivesa
yo os aah yo vanaspatisu tasmai devaya namonamah

3 ko hyeitinyat hah pranyat yad esa Ghasa dnando na syat?

2 IV, 1. a IV,3. s IV, 20.

Re. Veda, X, x21, 2: see also Katha Up., Ill, 1. Cp. Deuteronomy:
“[ idl and make alive, ” xxii. 39.

7 Cp. Rami: “Thy light is at once joined to all things and apart
from all.” Shams-i-Tabriz (E.T. By Nicholson), Ode IX.

* Mundaka Up., III, 1, 1-3. Cp. Boehme: ‘And the deep of the
darkness is as great as the habitation of the light; and they stand
not one distant from the other but together in one another and
aelther of them hath beginning nor end.” Three Principles,

+76.24 The Bhagavadgita

personality are not arbitrary constructions or fictions of the
mind. They are two ways of looking at the Eternal. The
Supreme in its absolute self-existence is Brahman, the
Absolute and as the Lord and Creator contaifiing and con-
trolling all, is Igvara, the God. ‘‘Whether the Supreme is
regarded as undetermined or determined, this Siva should
be known as eternal; undetermined He is, when vicwed as
different from the creation and determined, when He is
everything.’ If the world is a cosmos and not an amorphous
uncertainty, it is due to the oversight of God. The Bhagavata
makes out that the one Reality which is of the nature of
untlivided consciousness is called Brahman, the Supreme
Self or God.2 He is the ultimate principle, the real self in
us as well as the God of worship. The Supreme is at once the
transcendental, the cosmic and the individual reality. In Its
transcendental aspect, It is the pure self unaffected by any
action or experience, detached, unconcerned. In Its dynamic
cosmic aspect, It not only supports but governs the whole
cosmic action and this very Self which is one in all and above
all is present in the individual.3

‘$vara is not responsible for evil except in an indirect way.
If the universe consists of active choosing individuals who
can be influenced but not controlled, for God is not a dictator,
conflict is inevitable. To hold that the world consists of free
spirits means that evil is possible and probable. The alter-
native to a mechanical world is a world of risk and adventure.
If all tendencies to error, ugliness and evil are to be excluded,
there can be no seeking of the true, the beautiful and: the
good. If there is to be an active willing of these ideals of
truth, beauty and goodness, then their opposites of error,
ugliness and evil are not merely abstract possibilities but

+ nirgunas sagunas’ cetr’swo pheyah sandtanah
nivgunah prakyter anyah, sagunas sakalah smrtah.
+ vadanti tat tattvavidah tattvar yaj jnanam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan itt Sabdyate.
Cp also:
utpattim ca vindsam ca bhittanam agatirn gatim
vetti vidyam avidyam ca sa vdcyo bhagavin tts.
3 Cp. §. on Brhadaranyaka Up., IL, 8, 12. Roughly we may say
that the Self in its transcendental, cosmic and individual aspects
answers to the Christian Trinity of Father, Son and Holy Ghost.Introductory Essay 25

positive tendencies which we have to resist. For the Gia, the
world is the scene of an active struggle between good and
evil in which God is deeply interested. He pours out His
wealth of love in helping man to resist all that makes for
error, ugliness and evil. As God is completely good and His
Jove is boundless, He is.concerned about the suffering of the
world. God is omnipotent because there are no external
limits to His power. The social nature of the world is not
imposed on Goa, but is willed by Him. To the question,
whether God’s omniscience includes a foreknowledge of
the way in which men will behave and use or abuse their
freedom of choice, we can only say that what God does
not know is not a fact. He knows that the tendencies are
indeterminate and when they become actualized, He is aware
of them. The law of karma does not limit God’s omnipotence.
The Hindu thinkers even during the period of the com-
position of the Rg. Veda, knew about the reasonableness and
lawabidingness of nature. Rta or order embraces all things.
The reign of law is the mind and will of God and cannot
therefore be regarded as a limitation of His power. The
personal Lord of the universe has a side in time, which is
“subject to change.

The emphasis of the Gita is on the Supreme as the per-
sonal God who creates the perceptible world by His nature
(prakrti). He resides in the heart of every being; He is the

_enjoyer and lord of all sacrifices.» He stirs our hearts to
“devotion and grants our prayers.3 He is the source and
sustainer of values. He enters into personal relations with
us in worship and prayer.

The personal Iévara is responsible for the creation, pre-
servation and dissolution of the universe. The Supreme has
two natures, the higher (para) and the lower (apar4).s The
living souls represent the higher and the material medium
the lower. God is responsible for both the ideal plan and the
concrete medium through which the ideal becomes the

+ XVIII, 6x. 2 IX, 24. 3 VIL, 22.

4 Cp. Jacob Boebme: “Creation was the act of the Father; the
incarnation that of the Son; while the end of the world will be
brought about through the operation of the Holy Ghost.”

s VII, 4-5.26 The Bhagavadgita

actual, the conceptual becomes the cosmic. The concretiza-
tion of the conceptual plan requires a fullness of existence,
an objectification in the medium of potential matter. While
God’s ideas are seeking for existence, the world of existence
is striving for perfection. The Divine pattern and the poten-
tial matter, both these are derived from God, who is the
beginning, the middle and the end, Brahmi, Visnu and Siva.
God with His creative ideas is Brahma. God who pours out
His love and works with a patience which is matched only

‘ by His love is Visnu, who is perpetually at work saving the
world. When the conceptual becomes the cosmic, when
heaven is established on earth, we have the fulfilment repre-
sented by Siva. God is at the same time wisdom, love and
perfection. The three functions cannot be torn apart. Brahma,
Visnu and Siva are fundamentally one though conceived in
a threefold manner. The Gita is interested in the process
of redeeming the world. So the aspect of Visnu is emphasized.
Krsna represents the Visnu aspect of the Supreme.

Visnu is a familiar deity in the Rg. Veda. He is the great
pervader, from vis, to pervade.! He is the internal controller
who pervades the whole universe. He gathers to Himself
in an ever increasing measure the position and dignity of
the Eternal Supreme. Taittiriya Aranyaka says: “To
Narayana we bring worship; to Vasudeva our meditations
and in this may Visnu assist us.”

Krsna,3 the teacher of the Gita, becomes identified with
Visnu, the ancient Lord of the Sun, and Narayana, an

1 Amara states, vyapake paramesvare. It is traced also from vié,
to enter. Taittiriya Up. says: “Having created that world, he after-
wards entered into it.” See also Padma Purana. Visnu as the Lord
entered into prakrti. sa eva bhagavan visnuh prakytyam dvivesaha.

aX, 1, 6. ndrayandya vidmahe vdsudevaya dhimahi tan no visnub
pracodayai, Narayana says: “Being like the Sun, I cover the whole
world with rays, and I am also the sustainer of all beings and am
hence called Vasudeva.” M.B., XII, 341, 41.

3 karsati sarvam kysnah. He who attracts all or arouses devotion
in all is krsna. Veddntaratnamaijisa (p. 52) says that Krsna is so
called because he removes the sins of his devotees, paparh harsayati,
nirmilayati. Krsna is derived from hrs, to scrape, because he scrapes
or draws away all sins and other sources of evil from his devotees.
hysater vilekhandrthasya riiparn bhaktajanapapadidosakarsanat kysnah.
§.BG., VI, 34.Introductory Essay 27

ancient God of cosmic character and the goal or resting place
of gods and men.

The Real is the supracosmic, eternal, spaceless, timeless
Brahman who supports this cosmic manifestation in space
and time. He is the Universal Spirit, Paramatman, who
ensouls the cosmic forms and movements. He is the Para-
megvara who presides over the individual souls and move-
ments of'nature and controls the cosmic becoming. He is
also the Purusottama, the Supreme Person, whose dual
nature is manifested in the evolution of the cosmos. He fills
our being, illumines our understanding and sets in motion
its hidden springs.t .

All things partake of the duality of being and non-being
from Purusottama downwards. Even God has the element
of negativity or maya though He controls it. He puts forth
His active nature (svdm prakptim) and controls the souls who
work out their destinies along lines determined by their own
natures. While all this is done by the Supreme through His
native power exercised in this changing world, He has
another aspect untouched by it all. He is the impersonal
Absolute as well as the immanent will; He is the uncaused
cause, the unmoved mover. While dwelling in man and

1 He brings to the ignorant the light of knowledge, to the feeble
the power of strength, to the sinner the liberation of forgiveness,
to the suffermg the peace of mercy, to the comtortless comfort ...
jaanam ajfianam, saktir asaktandm, ksama s&parddhandm, kypa
dubkhinam, vdtsalyam sadosandm, slam mandanam, drjavam kufi-
landm, sauhadrdyam dustahydayandm, mardavam vislesabhirinam,

Cp. also “Thou art joy and bliss, Thou the abode of peace: Thou
dost destroy the sorrow of creatures and give them happiness.”

“Gnandamytaripas tvarh tvam ca santiniketanam

havasi praninam duhkham vidadhast sada sukham.”

“Thou art the refuge of the weak, the saviour of the sinful.”

“dinandms saranarh tuar hi, papindm muktisddhanam.”

See also: “Thou who art radiance, fill me with radiance, Thou
who art valour, fill me with valour: Thou who art strength, give
me strength: Thou who art vitality, endow me with vitality: Thou
who art wrath (against wrong), instil that wrath into me: Thouwho art
fortitude, fill me with fortitude.” tejo’si tejo mayi dehi, viryam asi
vlyyar mayi dhehi, balam asi balam mayi ghehi, oj0'si ojo mayi dhehi,
manyuy asi mahyurh mdyi dhehi, saho'si sahomayi dhehi. Sukla Yajur
Veda, XIX, 9.28 The Bhagavadgita

nature, the Supreme is greater than both. The boundless
universe in an endless space and time rests in Him and not
He in itt The God of the Gita cannot be identified with the
cosmic process for He extends beyond it. Even in it He is
manifest more in some aspects than in others. The charge of
pantheism in the lower serise of the term cannot be urged
against the Gita view.3 While there is one reality that is
ultimately perfect, everything that is concrete and actual
is not equally perfect. ~

5. Krsna, the teacher

So far as the teaching of the Bhagavadgita is concerned,
it is immaterial whether Krsna, the teacher, is a historical
individual or not. The material point is the eternal incar-
nation of the Divine, the everlasting bringing forth of the
perfect and divine life in the universe and the soul of man.

There is, however, ample evidence in favour of the his-
toricity of Krsna. The Chandogya Up. refers to Krsna,
devakiputra, the son of Devaki, and speaks of him as the
pupil of Ghora Aagirasas who is a priest of the sun, according
to Kausttaki Brahmana.s After interpreting the meaning of
sacrifice and making out that the true payment for the
priests is in the practice of the virtues of austerity, charity,
uprightness non-violence and truthfulness,‘ the Upanisad con-
tinues ‘When Ghora Angirasa explained this to Krsna, the
son-of Devaki, he also said, that, in the final hour, one should
take refuge in these three thoughts. “‘Thou art the indes-
tructible (aksita), thou art the immovable (acyuta), thou
art the very essence of life (prana).’"7 There is a great simi-
larity between the teaching of Ghora Angirasa in the
Upanisad and that of Krsna in the Gita.

Krsna plays an important part in the story of the M.B.
where he is presented as the friend of Arjuna. Panini refers
to Vasudeva and Arjuna as objects of worship.8, Krsna

+ IX, 6, ro. +X, 41-2. 8X} 21-37.

4 III, 17, 6. s XXX, 6. <

6 tapo danam arjavam ahwinsd satyavacanam. See B.G., XVI, 1-3.

7 Cp. BG., VIII, 11-13. He possibly composed hymn 74 of the
8th mandala of Rg. Veda as he is called in Kausttaki Brahmana,
Krsna Angirasa. XXX, 9. # IV, 3, 98.Introductory Essay 29

belonged to the ancient Vrsni or Satvata branch of the family
of Yadu, whose home was perhaps in the neighbourhood
of Mathura, 2 town with which Krsna’s name has been
associated in history, tradition and“ legend. Krsna was
opposed to the sacerdotalism of the Vedic religion and
preached the doctrines which he learnt from Ghora Angirasa,
His opposition to the Vedic cult comes out in passages where
Indra when vanquished, humbled himself before Krsna.t
The Gia has references to those who complain about
Krsna’s teaching and express their lack of faith in him?
MLB. has indications that the supremacy of Krsna was not
accepted without challenge. In that epic Krsna is repre-
sented both as an historical individuals and as an incarnation
(avatara). Krsna taught the Satvatas the worship of the
Sun and the Satvatas perhaps identified the teacher with
the Sun he taught them to worship.4 By the fourth century
before Christ, the cult of Vasudeva was well established.
In the Buddhist work, Niddesa (fourth century B.c.) in-
cluded in the Pali Canon, the writer refers to the worshippers
of Vasudeva and Baladeva among others. Megasthenes
(320 B.C.) states that Herakles was worshipped by the
Saurasenoi (Siirasenas) in whose land are two great cities,
Methora (Mathura) and Kleisobora (Krsnapura). Heliodorus,
the Greek Bhagavata from Taxila, calls Vasudeva, devadeva
(god of gods) in the Besnagar inscription (x80 B.c.). The
Nanaghat inscription, which belongs to the first century
before the Christian era, mentions Vasudeva among the
deities invoked in the opening verse. Some of the principal
personages like Radha, YaSoda and Nanda figure in Buddhist
legends. Patafijali, in his Mahabhasya, commenting on

« “I am Indra of the devas but thou hast gained Indra’s power
over the cows. As Govinda the people will ever praise thee.”
Harivarhsa, 4004 ff.

2 III,'s2; IX, 11; XVIII, 67. ‘

3 The story of his early life with legends and fancies is found in
the Bhagauata and the Harivamsa.

4 According to Bhagavata, the Satvatas worship the Supreme as
Bhagavan and as Vasudeva. IX. 9, 50. Yamundcarya in his
Agamaprimanya says that those who worship God in purity of spirit
are called Bhagavata and Satvata: sattuad bhagavan bhajyate yaik
paral puman te sdtvata bhagavata ity ucyante duijottamaih.30 The Bhagavadgita

Panini, IV, 3, 98, calls Vasudeva Bhagavat. ‘The book is
called Bhagavadgita because Krsna is known ia the Bhaga-
vata religion as Sri Bhagavan. The doctrine which he
preaches is the Bhagavata creed. In the Gita, Krsna says
that he is not expressing any new view but is only repeating
what has been preached by him to Vivasvan and by Vivasvan
to Manu and by Manu to Iksvaku.t M.B. says that “‘the
Bhagavata religion has been traditionally handed down by
Vivasvan to Manu and by Manu to Iksvaku.’’? The two
traditions similarly propagated must have been the same.
There are other evidences also. In the exposition of the Nara-
yaniya or the Bhagavata religion, it is said that this religion
was described by the Lord previously in the Bhagavadgita.3
Again, it is declared that it ‘‘was taught by the Lord when,
during the fight between the Kauravas and the Pandavas,
both the armies had got ready for war and Arjuna had
become depressed.’ This is the religion of monotheism
(ekantika).

In the Gita Krsna is identified with the Supreme Lord,
the unity that lies behind the manifold universe, the change-
less truth behind all appearances, transcendent over all
and immanent in all. He is the manifested Lord,5 making
it easy for mortals to know, for those who seek the Imperish-
able Brahman reach Him no doubt but after great toil. He
is called Paramatman which implies transcendence; he is
jiva-bhiita, the essential life of all.

How can we identify an historical individual with the
Supreme God? The representation of an individual as iden-
tical with the Universal Self is familiar to Hindu thought.
In the Upanisads, we are informed that the fully awakened
soul, which apprehends the true relation to the Absolute
sees that it is essentially one with the latter and declares
itself to be so. In the Rg. Veda, IV, 26, Vamadeva says:
“Tam Manu, I am Siirya, I am the learned sage Kaksivan.
I have adorned the sage Kutsa, the son of Arjuni. I am the

rIV, 1, 3. 4 Santiparva, 348, 51-2.

3 hathito harigitasu. Santiparva, 346, 10.

4 samupodhesvanihesu kurupandavayor mydhe
arjuné vimanaske ca gita bhagavata svayam. Santiparva, 348, 8.
5 XII, 1 ff.Introductory Essay 3r

wise Usand; look at me... .” In the Kausitaki Up. (IIl),
Indra says to Pratardana ‘‘I am the vital breath. I am the
conscious self, Worship me as life, as breath. He who worships
me as life, 4s immortality, obtains full life in this world.
He obtains immortality and indestructibility in the heavenly
regions.”* In the Gita, the author says: ‘“‘Delivered from
passion, fear and anger, absorbed in Me, taking refuge in
Me, many purified by the austerity of wisdom have attained
to My state of being.” The ego holds something other than
itself, to which it should abandon itself. In this abandonment
consists its transfiguration. A liberated soul uses his body as
a vehicle for the manifestation of the Eternal. The divinity
claimed by Krsna is the common reward of all earnest spiritual
seekers. He is not a hero who once trod the earth and has now
left it, having spoken to His favourite friend and disciple, but
is everywhere and in every one of us, as ready to speak to us
now as He ever was to any one else. He is not a bygone
personality but the indwelling spirit, an object for our
spiritual consciousness.

God is never born in the ordinary sense. Processes of birth
and incarnation which imply limitation do not apply to Him.
When the Lord is said to manifest Himself at a particular

:S., commenting on this, observes: “That is, Indra, a deva,
looking on his own self as the Supreme Brahman by the vision of
the sages according to the Sastras, says, ‘Know me’ just as the
sage Vamadeva seeing the same truth, felt, ‘I am Manu, I am
Sarya.’ In the Sruti (that is the Brhadavanyaka Up.) it is said,
‘The worshipper becomes one with tne god he truly sees.’”

2 IV, 10. Jesus spent his life in solitary prayer, meditation and
service, was tempted like any of us, had spiritual experiences like
the great mystics and in a moment of spiritual anguish, when he
lost the sense of the presence of God, cried out, “My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me?” (Mavh xv, 34). Throughout, he felt
his dependence on God. ‘‘The father is greater than I’: (John xiv,
28). “Why callest thou me good? None is good, save one, even God”
(Luke xviii, 19). “But of that day and that hour knoweth no one,
not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son but the Father”
(Mark xiii, 32). “Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit”
(Luke xxiii, 46). Though conscious of his imperfections, Jesus recog-
nized the grace and love of God and willingly submitted himself
entirely to Him. Thus delivered from all imperfection and taking
refuge in Him, he attained to a divine status. “I and the Father are
one” (John x, 30).32 The Bhagavadgita

time, on a particular occasion, it only means that it takes
place with reference to a finite being. In Chapter XI the
whole world is seen in God. The subjective and the objective

. processes of the world are only the expression$ of the higher
and lower natures of the Supreme; yet in whatever is
glorious, beautiful and strong, God’s presence becomes more
manifest. When any finite individual develops spiritual
qualities and shows large insight and charity, he sits in
judgment on the world and starts a spiritual and social
upheaval and we say that God is born for the protection
of the good, the destruction of the evil and the establishment
of the kingdom of righteousness. As an individual, Krsna
is one of millions of forms through which the Universal
Spirit manifests Itself. The author of the Gita mentions
Krsna of history as one of many forms along with his
disciple Arjuna.t The avatara is the demonstration of man’s
spiritual resources and latent divinity. It is not so much the
contraction of Divine majesty into the limits of the human
frame as the exaltation of human nature to the level of
Godhead by its union with the Divine.

Theism, however, makes out that Krsna is an incarnation
(avatarana) or descent of the Divine into the human frame.
Though the Lord knows no birth or change, He has many
times been born. Krsna is the human embodiment of Visnu.
He is the Supreme who appears to the world as though
born and embodied.?, The assumption of human nature by
the Divine Reality, like the creation of the world, does not
take away from or add to the integrity of the Divine.

 

1X, 37.

2. writes: sa ca bhagavin jrdnaisvaryasaktibalaviryatejobhih,
sada sampannah, triguna: i vaisnavine svam mayarn milaprakytim
vasikytya, ajo avyayo bhitandm isvaro nityasuddhabuddhumukia-
svabhavopi san svaindyaya dehavin iva ata iva, lohanugraham kurvan-
niva laksyate, amsena sambabhiva does not mean that Krsna is born
of a part or is a partial incarnation. Anandagiri interprets arena to
mean “in a phenomenal form created by his own will” svecchanirmi-
tena mayamayena svariipena. While the Apostle’s Creed lays stress on
the human nature of the Son of God, “who was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead and buried,” the Nicene Creed adds that he
“came down from heaven and was made flesh.” This coming down
or descent of God into flesh is the aratarana.Introductory Essay 33

Creation and incarnation both belong to the world of mani-
festation and not to the Absolute Spirit.

If the Infipite God is manifested im finite existence
throughout time, then Its special manifestation at one given
moment and through the assumption of one single human
nature is but the free fulfilment of that same movement
by which the Divine plenitude freely fulfils itself and
inclines towards the finite. It does not raise any fresh
problem apart from that of creation. If a human organ-
ism can be made in the image of God, if new patterns
can be woven into the stuff of repetitive energy, if eternity
can be incorporated in these ways into succession, then the
Divine Reality can express His absolute mode of being in
and through a completely human organism. The scholastic
theologians tell us that God is present in the creatures, ‘‘by
essence, presence, power.” The relation between the Absolute,
infinite, self-existent and immutable and the finite human
individual who is enmeshed in the temporal order is un-
imaginably intimate though difficult to define and explain.
In the great souls we call incarnations, God who is responsible
for the being and dignity of man has more wonderfully
renewed it. The penetration of suvcessiveness by the Eternal
which is present in every event of the cosmic is manifested
in a deeper sense in the incarnations. When once God has
granted us free will, He does not stand aside leaving us
to make or unmake ourselves. Whenever by the abuse of
freedom unrighteousness increases and the world gets stuck
in a rut, He creates Himself to lift the world from out of its
tut and set it on new tracks. Out of His love He is born
again and again to renew the work of creation on a higher
plane. According to a passage in the M.B., the Supreme who
is ever ready to protect the worlds has four forms. One
of them dwells on earth practising penance; the second
keeps watch over the actions of erring humanity; the
third is engaged in activity in the world of men, and
the fourth is plunged in the slumber of a thousand

* Cp, Hooker: “This admirable union of God with man can enforce
in that higher nature no alternation because with God there is nothing
more natural than not to be subject to any change.’ Ecclesiastical
Polity (1888 ed.), vol. ii, p. 234.34 The Bhagavadgita

years.t Absolute impassivity is not the only side of Divine
nature. The Hindu tradition makes out that the avataras are
not confined to the human level. The presenge of pain and
imperfection is traced not to man’s rebellious will but to a
disharmony between the creative purpose of God and the
actual world. If suffering is traced to the “‘fall’” of man, we
cannot account for the imperfections of innocent nature, for
the corruption that infects all life, for the economy of disease.
The typical question, Why is there cancer in the fish?
cannot be avoided. The Gia points out that there is a Divitie
Creator who imposes His forms on the abysmal void. Prakrti
is the raw material, the chaos out of which order is to be
evolved, a night which is to be illumined. In the struggle
between the two, whenever a deadlock is created, there is
Divine interference to release the deadlock. Besides, the idea
of one unique revelation is hardly consistent with our present
views of the universe. The tribal God gradually became the
God of the earth and the God of the earth has now become
the God of the universe, perhaps only one of many universes.
It is inconceivable th: t the Supreme is concerned only with
one part of one of the smallest of planets.

The theory of avatira is an eloquent expression of the
law of the spiritual world. If God is looked upon as the
saviour of man, He must manifest Himself, whenever the
forces of evil threaten to destroy human values. An avatara
is a descent of God into man and not an ascent of man into
God, which is the case with the liberated soul. Though
every conscious being is such a descent, it is only a veiled
manifestation. There is a distinction between the self-
conscious being of the Divine and the same shrouded in
ignorance.

The fact of descent or avatarana indicates that the Divine
is not opposed to a full vital and physical manifestation.
We can live in the physical body and yet possess the full

1 caturmiurtiy aham savsal lokatrandrtham udyatah
Gtmanam pravibhayyeha lokdndm hitam adadhe
eh mirhs tapascaryam kurute me bhuvi sthita
_ apara pasyatt hurvayam stdhvasddhunt
apara kurute karma mdnusa lokam &sritd
s’ete caturthi tuapara nidvam varsasahasrikim,
Dronaparva, XXIX, 32-34.Introductory Essay 35

truth of consciousness. Human nature is not a fetter but
can become an instrument of divine life. Life and body with
us, ordinary mortals, remain ignorant, imperfect and im-
potent means of expression but they need not always be so.
The Divirie Consciousness uses these for Its purpose while the
unfree human consciousness has not this absolute control,
over the physical, vital and mental forces.

Though the Gita accepts the belief in avatara as the
Divine limiting Himself for some purpose on earth, possessing
in His limited form the fullness of knowledge, it also lays
stress on the eternal avatdra, the God in man, the Divine
consciousness always present in the human being The two
views reflect the transcendent and the immanent aspects of
the Divine and are not to be regarded as incompatible with
each other. The teacher, who is interested in the spiritual
illumination of the human race, speaks from the depths of
the Divine in him. Krsna’s avatara is an illustration of the
revelation of the Spirit in us, the Divine hidden in gloom.
According to the Bhagavata, ‘‘at midnight, in the thickest
darkness, the Dweller in every heart revealed Himself in the
divine Devaki for the Lord is the self hidden in the hearts of
all beings.” The glorious radiance arises from the blackest
of black nights. In mysteries and revelations the night is rich.
The presence of night does not make the existence of light
less real. Indeed but for night there could be no‘human
éonsciousness of light. The meaning of the birth of Krsna is
the fact of redemption in the dark night. In the hour of

1 misithe tamodbhiite jayamane janardane
devakyam devariipinyam visnuk sarvaguhasayah. .

vasudevagrhe sahsat bhagaviin purusah parah janisyate.
em agavin parusal ps Bhagavata XI. 23.
Cp. what is said about the Incarnation of Jesus Christ: “Whilst
all things were in quiet silence and night was in the midst of her
swift course; thine Almighty Word leapt down from heaven out of
thy royal throne. Alleluia.” The doctrine of the Incarnation agitated
the Christian world a great deal. Arius maintained that the Son is
not the equal of the Father but created by Him. The view that they
are not distinct but only diferent aspects of one Being is the theory
of Sabellius. The former emphasized the distinctness of the Father
and the Son and the latter their oneness. The view that finally
prevailed was that the Father and the Son were equal and of the
same substance; they were, however, distinct persons.
+X, 20; XVIII, 6r.36 The Bhagavadgita

calamity and enslavement the Saviour of the world is born.

Krsna is said to be born of Vasudeva and Devaki. When
our sattva nature is purified,t when the mirror of under-
standing is cleansed of the dust of desire, the light of pure
consciousness is reflected in it. When all seems lost, light
from heaven breaks, enriching our human life more than
words can tell. A sudden flash, an inward illumination we
have and life is seen fresh and new. When the Divine birth
takes place within us, the scales fall from our eyes, the bolts
of the prison open. The Lord abides in the heart of every
creature and when the veil of that secret sanctuary is with-
drawn, we hear the Divine voice, receive the Divine light,
act in the Divine power. The embodied human consciousness
is uplifted into the unborn eternal.2 The incarnation of
Krsna is not so much the conversion of Godhead into flesh
as the taking up of manhood into God.

The teacher slowly guides his pupil to attain the status
which he has, mama sadharmyam. The pupil, Arjuna, is the
type of the struggling soul who-has not yet received the
saving truth. He is fighting with the forces of darkness,
falsehood, limitation, and mortality which bar the way to the
higher world. When his whole being is bewildered, when he
does not know the valid law of action, he takes refuge in his

« sattvamn visuddhamn vasudeva sabditam. Bhagavata. Devaki is daivi
prakyti, divine nature.

2 This, to my mind, is the meaning of the Christian doctrine of
resurrection. The physical resurrection of Jesus is not the important
thing but the resurrection of the Divine. The rebirth of man as an
event that happens within his soul, resulting in a deeper under-
standing of reality and a greater love for God and man, is the true
resurrection which lifts human life to an awareness of its own Divine
content and purpose. God is perpetual creativity, ceaseless action.
He is the Son of Man for in man is God reborn. When the veil between
the eternal and the temporal is lifted, man walks with God and as
He directs.

Cp. Angelus Silesius: Though Christ a thousand times

In Bethlehem be born,

If He’s not born in thee
Thy soul is still forlorn.

‘The Cross on Golgotha

‘Will never save thy soul,
The Cross in thine own heart
Alone can make thee whole.Introductory Essay 37

higher self, typified as Krsna, the world teacher, jagadgurut
and appeals for the grace of enlightenment. “‘I am thy
disciple. Illumine my consciousness. Remove what is dark in
me. Give me that which I have lost, a clear rule of action.”
The rider in the chariot of the body is Arjuna but
the charioteer is Krsna and He has to guide the journey.
Every individual is a pupil, an aspirant for perfection, a
seeker of God and if he seeks earnestly, with faith, God
the goal becomes God the guide. It is of little moment, so
far as the validity of the teaching is concerned, whether the
author is a figure of history or the very god descended into
man, for the realities of spirit are the same pow as they were
thousands of years ago and differences of race and nationality _
do not affect them. The essential thing is truth or significance;
and the historical fact is nothing more than the image of it.

6. The Status of the World and the Concept of Maya

If the fundamental form of the Supreme is nirguna, quality-
less and acintya, inconceivable, the world is an appearance
which cannot be logically related to the Absolute. In the
unalterable eternity of Brahman, all that moves and evolves
is founded. By It they exist, they cannot be without It,
though It causes nothing, does nothing, determines nothing.

« Cp. ajfanatimirandhasya jaananjanasalakaya
caksur unmilitam yena tasmai Srigurave namah,
I bow to the divine teacher, who opens the eyes of one blinded
by the disease of ignorance by means of the principle (collyrium)
of knowledge.

2 Cp. Spinoza: “It is not in the least needful for salvation to
know Christ according to the flesh; but concerning that so-called
eternal Son of God (de aeterno illo Dei filio), that is, God’s eternal
wisdom, which is manifested in all things, and chiefly in the mind
of man, and most particularly in Christ Jesus, the case is far other-
wise. For without this no man can arrive at a state of blessedness,
inasmuch as nothing else can teach him what is true or false, what
is: good or evil.” Thus Spinoza distinguishes between the historical
Jesus and the ideal Christ, The divinity of Christ is'a dogma that
has grown in the Christian conscience. Christological doctrine is the
theological explanation of the historic fact. Loisy observes: “The
Resurrection of Jesus was not the last step of His terrestrial career,
the last act of His ministry amongst men, but the first article of the
faith of the Apostles and the spiritual foundation of Christianity.”
Maude Petre: Loisy (1944), pp. 65-66.38 The Bhagavadgtta

While the world is dependent on Brahman, the latter is not
dependent on the world. This one-sided dependence and the
logical inconceivability of the relation betwegn the Ultimate
Reality and the world are brought out by the word, “maya.”
The world is not essential being like Brahman; nor is it mere
non-being. It cannot be defined as either being or non-
being. The sudden discovery through religious experience
of the ultimate reality of spirit inclines us sometimes to look
upon the world as an illusion rather than as a misapprehen-
sion or a misconstruction. Maya does not imply that the
world is an illusion or is non-existent absolutely. It is a
delimitation distinct from the unmeasured and the immeasur-
able. But why is there this delimitation? The question cannot
be answered, so long as we are at the empirical level.

In every religion, the Supreme Reality is conceived as
infinitely above our time order, with its beginning and end,
its movements and fluctuations. God, in the Christian reli-
gion, is represented as without variableness or shadow of
turning. He dwells in the eternal now seeing the end from
the beginning. If this were all, there would be an absolute
division between the Divine life and this pluralistic world,
which would make all communion between the two impossible.
If the Supreme Reality were unique, passive and immobile,
there would be no room for time, for movement, for history.
Time, with its processes of change and succession, would
become a mere appearance. But God is a living principle, a
consuming fire. It is not a question of either an Absolute
with an apparent multiplicity or a living God working in
this pluralistic universe. The Supreme is both this and that.
Eternity does not mean the denial of time or of history. It
is the transfiguration of time. Time derives from eternity
and finds fulfilment in it. In the Bhagavadgité, there is no
antithesis between eternity and time. Through the figure of
Krsna, the unity between the eternal and the historical
is indicated. The temporal movement is related to the inmost
depths of eternity.

The Spirit which transcends all dualities, when looked at
from the cosmic end becomes sundered into the transcen-
dental subject facing the transcendental object. Subject and

' sadasadbhym anirvacaniyam,Introductory Essay 39

object are the two poles of the one Reality. They are not
unrelated. The principle of objectivity, milaprakrti, the
unmanifesteds (avyakta) potentiality of all existence is of
the very nature of the creative Logos, Igvara. The eternal
“T’ confronts the pseudo-eternal “‘not I,” Narayana broods
over the waters. As the “‘not-I,” prakrti, is a reflection of the
Self, it is subordinate to the Self. When the element of
negation is introduced into the Absolute, its inwardness is
unfolded in the process of becoming. The original unity
becomes pregnant with the whole course of the world.

Cosmic process is the interaction between the two prin-
ciples of being and non-being. God is the upper limit with
the least affection by and complete control of non-being and
matter or prakrti is the lower limit with the least affection
by being. The whole cosmic process is the Supreme God
working on prakrti which is conceived as a positive entity
because it has the power of resistance. As resisting form, it
is evil. Only in God is it completely penetrated and overcome.
In the rest of the created world, it is there in some degree
or other, obscuring the light.

The Gita does not uphold a metaphysical dualism; for the
principle of non-being is dependent on being. Non-being is
a necessary moment in reality for the unfolding of the
Supreme. If the world is what it is, it is because of the
tension. The world of time and change is ever striving to
reach perfection. Non-being which is responsible for the
imperfections is a necessary element in the world, for it is
the material in which the ideas of God are actualized.t The
Divine forms (purusa) and matter (prakrti) belong to one
spiritual whole. When the whole world is delivered from
bondage, when it is lifted into incorruption, when it becomes
completely illuminated, the purpose of the Supreme is
realized and the world is restored to its origin in pure Being,
above all distinctions.

Why is there non-being? Why is ‘there the fall or the
precipitation from absolute being to becoming? This is to ask
why is there the world with its perpetual strife between being
and non-being? Absolute being, the one Godhead, is behind

1 Cp. Proclus who regards matter as a “child of God” which is
bound to be transformed into spirit.40 The Bhagavadgita

and beyond the world and in the world; He is also the
Supreme Living God, loving the world and redeeming it by
His grace. Why is the world what it is witheits graduated
hierarchy? We can only say, it is the nature of the Supreme
to express Itself in this way. We cannot account for the fact
of the world but can only construe its nature, which is a
strife between being and non-being in the process of becom-
ing. Pure being is above the world and pure non-being is
below the lowest existent. If we go lower still we have
nothing, it is absolute non-entity. In the world of true
becoming, sathsdra, we have the conflict between the two
principles of being and non-being.

The first product of the interaction is the cosmic egg
(brahmanda) which includes within itself the totality of
manifested being. All later developments are contained
within it in a germinal form. It contains the past, the present
and the future in a supreme now. Arjuna sees the whole
Visvariipa, world-form, in one vast shape. He sees the form
of the Divine bursting the very bounds of existence, filling
the whole sky and the universe, worlds coursing through
it like cataracts.

Those who look upon the Supreme as impersonal and rela-
tionless regard the conception of Ivara with his power of
self-manifestation as the result of ignorance (avidy4).t The
power of thought that produces forms which are transient
and therefore unreal compared with.the Eternal Reality, this
power of producing appearances is called avidya. But
avidya is not something peculiar to this or that individual.
It is said to be the power of self-manifestation possessed by
the Supreme. The Lord says that though He, in reality, is
birthless, He comes to birth by His own power dtmaméyaya.?
Maya is derived from the root, m4, to form, to build, and

1 §. says: “The names and forms imagined to exist in the Supreme
Isvara as a result of the ignorance of the nature of the Atman, of
which it is not possible to say whether they are different, or non-
different from the Supreme are in Sruti and Smrti texts called may4,
Sakti, prakrti of the all knowing ParameSvara.” S.B., II, 1, 14.

2 IV, 6. “The Supreme Lord chose to sport in the exercise of His
power of Yoga.”

Bhagavan api ranturh manascakve yogamayam upasritah. Bhagavata,
X, 29, 1. Divine activity is not undertaken for the fulfilment of anyIntroductory Essay 4I

originally meant the capacity to produce forms. The creative
power by which God fashions the universe is called yoga
maya. There is no suggestion that the forms, the events and
the objects produced by miya or the form-building power
of God, the myin, are only illusory.

Maya is sometimes said to be the source of delusion (moha).
“Deluded by these threefold modes of nature (guna), this
whole world does not recognize Me who am above them
and imperishable.” Through the force of maya we have a
bewildering partial consciousness which loses sight of the
reality and lives in the world of phenomena. God’s real being
is veiled by the play of prakrti and its modes. The world
is said to be deceptive because God hides Himself behind His
creation. The world is not a deception but the occasion for
it. We must shatter all forms, get behind the veil to find
the reality. The world and its changes constitute the self-
concealment of God (tivodhana) or obscuring of the Creator
by His creation. Man is inclined to turn towards the objects
of the world instead of directing his mind to the Creator.
God seems to be the great deceiver as He creates the world
and its sense objects and turns our senses outward? The
proneness to self-deception lies in the desire for the things
of sense which actually leads man away from God. The
glamour of the world casts its spell on us and we become
slaves to its prizes. The world or objectivized nature or
satnsira is fallen, enslaved, alienated and it is full of suf-
fering, as alienation from inward being is suffering. When
it is said that ‘“‘this divine maya of mine is hard to over-
purpose of his own, because'God is nityatypra. This feature of disinter-
estedness is brought out by the use of the word sport. lokavat tu lila
haivalyam, Brahma Sitra, II, t, 33. Radha Up. says that the One
God is eternally at play in the varied activities of the world. eko devo
nityalilanuraktah, IV, 3

1 VII, 13. Cp. ‘Narada Paficaratra. “One only is the Lord always, in
all and in each. All beings come into existence by His action; but they
are deceived by His may4.” II, 1, 22. In M.B, it is said: “O, Narada,
that which you see is the maya which has been created by Me. Do
not think that i possess the qualities, which are to be found in the
created worl

maya hy esd may’ systd yan mira pasyass ndvada
sarvabhitagunair yuktar naiva tvarh jidtum arhast.

* Ratha Up., IV, 1. Santiparva, 339, 44.42 The Bhagavadgita
come,” it means that we cannot easily pierce behind the
universe and its activities.

We may here distinguish the different senses in which the
word ‘“‘maya”’ is used and indicate its place in ‘the Gitd. (x) If
the Supreme Reality is unaffected by the events of the world,
then the rise of these events becomes an inexplicable mystery.
The author of the Gita does not use the term, ‘“‘may4,” in
this sense, however much it may be implied in his views.
The conception of a beginning-less, and at the same time
unreal, avidy4 causing the appearance of the world, does
not enter the mind of the author. (2) The personal Igvara
is said to combine within Himself, sat and asat, the immu-
tability of Brahman as well as the mutation of becoming.*
Maya is the power which enables Him to produce mutable
nature. It is Sakti or the energy of Igvara, or dtmavibhiiti,
the power of self-becoming. Iévara and mfya in this sense
are mutually dependent and beginning-less.3 This power of
the Supreme is called maya in the Gita.4 (3) Since the Lord
is able to produce the universe by means of the two elements
of His being, prakrti and purusa, matter and consciousness,
they are said to be maya (higher and lower) of God.s
(4) Gradually, maya comes to mean the lower prakrti, since
purusa is said to be the seed which the Lord casts into
the womb of prakrti for the generation of the universe.
(5) As the manifested world hides the real from the vision
of mortals, it is said to be delusive in character.6 The world
is not an illusion, though by regarding it as a mere mechani-
cal determination of nature unrelated to God, we fail to per-
ceive its Divine essence. It then becomes a source of delusion.
The Divine maya becomes avidyémaya. It is so, however, only
for us mortals, shut off from the truth; to God who knows
all and controls it, it is vidyamaya. God seems to be enveloped
in the immense cloak of maya.7 (6) Since the world is only

+ VIL, 14; see also Iéa Up., 16. 2 IX, 19.

3 See Sandilya Sitra, II, 13 and 15; SvetAévatara Up., IV, to.

4 XVIIL, 61; IV, 6. s IV, 16. 6 VII, 25 and 14.

7 maya which does not produce avidya is said to be sdituiki maya.
When it is polluted, it breeds ignorance or avidyd. Brahman reflected
in the former is I$vara, while that reflected in the latter is jiva,
or the individual self. This is later Vedanta; see Paficadaéi, I, 15-17.
Gita is not aware of this view.Introductory Essay eB
an effect of God, who is the cause and since everywhere
the cause is more real than the effect, the world as effect
is said to be less real than God the cause, This relative
unreality of the world is confirmed by the self-contradictory
nature of the process of becoming. There is a struggle of
opposites in the world of experience, and the real is above
all opposites."

7. The Individual Self

Reality is, in its own nature, infinite, absolute, untramelled,
inalienably possessed of its own unity and bliss. In the cosmic
process, dualities and oppositions which obscure the infinite
undivided reality arise. In the terms of the Taittiriya Up.,
the cosmic process has assumed the five stages of matter?
(anna), life (prana), mind (manas), intelligence (vijfiana) and

liss (Ananda). There is an inner direction given to things
by reason of their participation in the creative onrush of
life. The human being is at the fourth stage of vijfiana or
intelligence. He is not master of his acts. He is aware of the
universal reality which is operating in the whole scheme.
He seems to know matter, life and mind. He has mastered,
to a large extent, the material world, the vital existence
and even the obscure workings of mentality but has not yet
become the completely illumined consciousness. Even as
matter is succeeded by life, life by mind and mind by intelli-
gence, even so the intelligent man will grow into a higher
and divine life. Progressive self-enlargement has been the
impulse of nature. God’s purpose for the world or the cosmic
destiny for man is the realization of the immortal aspiration
through this mortal frame, the achievement of the Divine
life in and through this physical frame and intellectual
consciousness.

The Divine dwells in the inmost being of man and cannot
be extinguished. It is the inner light, the concealed witness,
that which endures and is imperishable from birth to birth,
untouched by death, decay or corruption. It is the principle
of the jiva, the psychic person which changes and grows
from life to life and when the ego is completely harmonized
by the Divine, it ascends into spiritual existence which is
TL, 45; VIL, 28; IX, 33. + Literally food.44 The Bhagavadgita

its destiny and until this happens it travels between birth
and death.

All forms of existence are found in each being for, under
the well-fixed traits of the human form, are the contours of
materiality, organization and animality. The matter, life and
mind that fill the world are in us as well. We partake of the
forces that work in the outer world. Our intellectual nature
produces self-consciousness; it leads to the emergence of the
human individual from its original solidarity with nature.
The security which he derives from the instinctive adherence
to the group is lost and has to be regained at a higher level
without the elimination of his individuality. By the integra-
tion of his self, his unity with the world has to be achieved
in a spontaneity of love and unselfish work. Arjuna, in the
opening scene, faces the world of nature and society and
feels utterly alone. He does not wish to buy inward security
by submission to the social standard. So long as he looks
upon himself as a ksatriya required to fight, so long as he
is chained to his station and its duties, he is unaware of the
full possibilities of his individual action. Most of us, by
finding our specific place in the social world, give a meaning
to our life and gain a feeling of security, a sense of belonging.
Normally, within limits, we find scope for the expression
of our life and the social routine is not felt as a bondage.
The individual has not yet emerged. He does not conceive
of himself except through the social medium. Arjuna could
have overcome his feeling of helplessness and anxiety by
submitting completely to the social authority. But that
would be to arrest his growth. Any sense of satisfaction and
security derived by submission to external authority is
bought at the price of the integrity of the self. Modern views
like the totalitarian declare that the individual can be saved
by his absorption into society. They forget that the group
exists only to secure the complete unfolding of human per-
sonality. Arjuna disentangles himself from the social context,
stands alone and faces the perilous and overpowering aspects
of the world. Submission is not the human way of over-
coming loneliness and anxiety. By developing: our inner
spiritual nature, we gain a new kind of relatedness to the
world and grow into the freedom, where the integrity of theIntroductory Essay 45

self is not compromised. We then become aware of ourselves
as active creative individuals, living, not by the discipline
of external authority but by the inward rule of free devotion
to truth. .

The individual self is a portion of the Lord, a real, not
an imaginary form of the Supreme, a limited manifestation
of God. The soul which derives from the Supreme Isvara is
not so much an emanation as a member of the Supreme. It
draws its ideal from this superior principle which is like
a father who has given it existence. The soul’s substantial
existence springs from the Divine intellect and its expression
in life is effected by virtue of its vision of the Divine who is
its father and its ever-present companion. Its distinctiveness
is determined by the divine pattern and the context of the
senses and the mind which it draws to itself. The universal
is embodied in a limited context of mental—vital-physical
sheath.+ No individual is quite like his fellow; no life repeats
another and yet a single pattern runs through them all. The
essence of the ego, the distinguishing characteristic of human
personality is a certain creative unity, an inner purposive-
ness, a plan which has gradually shaped itself into an organic
unity, As our purpose is, so is our life. Any form which the
individual assumes is bound to be superseded, for he always
tries to transcend himself and this process will continue till
becoming reaches its end in being. The jivas are movements
in the being of God, individualized. When the egois lost ina
false identification with the not-self and its forms, itis bound;
but when through the development of proper understand-
ing, it realizes the true nature of the self and the not-self and
allows the apparatus produced by the not-self to be illumined
completely by the self, then it is freed. This realization is
possible through the proper functioning of buddhi or vijfiana.

The problem facing man is the integrationof his personality,
the development of a divine existence in which the spiritual
principle has the mastery over all the powers of soul and
body. This integral life is created by the spirit. The dis-
tinction between soul and body which links man with the
life of nature is not an ultimate one. It does not exist in the

' XV, 7. Many names are given to this divine essence of the
soul—apex, ground, abyss, spark, fire, inner light.  * XIUI, 21.46 The Bhagavadgita

radical sense in which Descartes affirmed it. The life of the
soul permeates the life of the body, even as the bodily life
has its effect on the soul. There is a vital unity of soul and
body in man. The real dualism is between spifit and nature,
between freedom and necessity. In the integrated personality
we have the victory of the spirit over nature, of freedom
over necessity. The Gita which looks upon both these as
aspects of the Supreme, affirms that we can spiritualize
nature and communicate another quality to it. We need not
crush or destroy nature.

The problem of freedom vs. determinism has meaning only
with reference to human individuals. It has no application
to the Absolute which is above all opposites or to the sub-
human species. of plants and animals. If man is but the
simple creature of instinct, if his desires and decisions are
only the resultants of the forces of heredity and environ-
ment, then moral judgments are irrelevant. We do not
condemn the lion for its ferocity or praise the lamb for its
meekness. Man is the possessor of freedom. After describing
the whole philosophy of life, the teacher asks Arjuna to do
as he chooses.? The whole teaching of the Gita requires man
to choose the good and realize it by conscious effort. There
are however many impediments to this freedom of choice.

Man is a complex multi-dimensional being, including
within him different elements of matter, life, consciousness,
intelligence and the divine spark. He is free when he acts
from the highest level and uses the other elements for the
realization of his purpose. But when he is on the level of
objective nature, when he does not recognize his distinction
from not-self, he becomes a slave to the mechanism of nature.
But, even when he falsely identifies himself with the objective
universe, and feels that he is subjected to the necessities of
nature, he is not without hope, for the One Spirit operates
at all levels of being. Even matter is a manifestation of the
Supreme. There is an element of spontaneity and creativity
inexplicable in terms of mechanical forces even in the lowest
forms of nature. Each plane of our being has its own con-
sciousness, its surface thoughts, its habitual ways of feeling,
thought and action. The ego should not persist in retaining

» svatantyah harta: Panini. 2 XVIII, 63.Introductory Essay 47

its obscure and limited consciousness, which is a distortion
of its true nature. When we subdue the senses and keep
them under control, the flame of spirit burns bright and
clear “‘like 2 lamp in a windless place.’”’ The light of con-
sciousness stands in its own nature and the empirical self
with its shifting tides of experience is controlled by buddhi
in which is reflected the light of consciousness. Then we rise
above the play of prakrti and see the real self from which
creative forces arise; we cease to belong to that which is
moved about and are no more helpless tools of nature. We
are free participants of the world above into the world below.
Nature is an order of determinism but not a closed order.
Forces of spirit may break upon it and change its course.
Every act of the self is a creative one, while all acts of the
not-self are truly passive. It is in our inner life that we
confront primary reality, the deeps of being. The law of
karma holds in the realm of the not-self where heredity,
biological and social, holds but in the subject is the possi-
bility of freedom, of triumph over the determinism of nature,
over the compulsion of the world. Man, the subject, should
gain mastery over man, the object. Object indicates deter-
minism from without; subject means freedom, indetermina-
tion. The ego, in its self-confinement, in its automatism,
psychical and social, is a distortion of the true subject. The
law of karma can be overcome by the affirmation of the
freedom of spirit. In several passages' the Gi#é affirms that
there is no radical dualism between the supernatural and the
natural. The cosmic forces to which man is exposed represent
the lower prakrti. But his spirit can burst the circle of nature
and realize its kinship with the Divine. Our bondage con-
sists in our dependence on something alien. When we rise
above it, we can make our nature the medium for the
incarnation of the spiritual. Through struggle and suffering,
man can pass from his freedom to choose good or evil to the
higher freedom that abides in the steadfastly chosen good.
Liberation is a return to inward being, to subjectivity;
bondage is enslavement to the object world, to necessity, to
dependence.

Neither nature nor society can invade our inner being

* See VII, 5.48 The Bhagavadgita

without permission. Even God acts with a peculiar delicacy
in regard to human beings. He woos our consent but never
compels. Human individuals have distinctive beings of their
own which limit God’s interference with their develop-
ment. The world is not fulfilling a prearranged plan in a
mechanical way. The aim of creation is the production of
selves who freely carry out God’s will. We are asked to con-
trol our impulses, shake off our wanderings and confusions,
tise above the current of nature and regulate our conduct
by reference to buddhi or understanding, as otherwise, we
will become the victims of “‘lust which is the enemy of man
on earth.” The Gita lays stress on the individual’s freedom of
choice and the way in which he exercises it. Man’s struggles,
his sense of frustration and self-accusation are not to be dis-
missed as errors of the mortal mind or mere phases of a
dialectic process. This would be to deny the moral urgency
of life. When Arjuna expresses his sense of awe and dread
in the presence of the Eternal, when he asks for forgiveness,
he is not acting a part but passing through a crisis.

Nature does not absolutely determine. Karma is a con-
dition, not a destiny. It is only one of the five factors involved
in the accomplishment of any act, which are adhisthana or
the basis or centre from which we work, kartr or doer, karana
or the instrumentation of nature, cesta or effort and daiva
or fate.? The last is the power or powers other than human,
the cosmic principle which stands behind, modifying the
work and disposing of its fruits in the shape of act and its
reward. We must make a distinction between that part which
is inevitable in the make-up of nature, where restraint does
not avail and the part where it could be controlled and
moulded to our purpose. There are certain factors in our
lives which are determined for us by forces over which we
have no control. We do not choose how or when or where
or in what condition of life we are born. On the theory of
rebirth, even these are chosen by us. It is our past karma
that determines our ancestry, heredity and environment.
But when we look from the standpoint of this life, we
can say that we were not consulted about our nationality,
race, parentage or social status. But subject to these limi-

III, 37; VI 5-6. 2 XVIII, 14.Introductory Essay 49

tations, we have freedom of choice. Life is like a game of
bridge. We did not invent the game or design the cards.
We did not frame the rules and we cannot control the dealing.
The cards are-dealt out to us, whether they be good or bad.
To that extent, determinism rules, But we can play the
game well or play it badly. A skilful player may have a poor
hand and yet win the game. A bad player may have a good
hand and yet make a mess of it. Our life is a mixture of
necessity and freedom, chance and choice. By exercising our
choice properly, we can control steadily all the elements and
eliminate altogether the determinism of nature. While the
movements of matter, the growth of plants and the acts of
animals are controlled more completely, man has under-
standing which enables him to co-operate consciously with
the work of the world. He can approve or disapprove, give
or withhold his consent to certain acts. If he does not exercise
his intelligent will, he is acting in a way contrary to his
humanity. If he acts blindly according to his impulses and
passions, he acts more like an animal than a man. Being
human, he justifies his actions.

Some of our acts are ours only seemingly. The sense of
spontaneity is only apparent. We sometimes carry out sug-
gestions given to us in the hypnotic condition. We may
believe that we think, feel and will the acts but in so doing
we may be giving exprossion to the suggestions conveyed
to us during the hypnotic state. What is true of the hypnotic
situation is true of many of our acts which may seem spon-
taneous but are really not so. We repeat the latest given
opinions and believe that they are the result of our own
thinking. Spontaneous acting is not compulsive activity to
which the individual is driven by his own isolation and
helplessness. It is the free acting of the total self. The indi-
vidual should become transparent to himself and the dif-
ferent elements should reach a fundamental integration for
spontaneous or creative activity to be possible. It is man’s
duty to control his rajas and tamas by means of his
sattva nature which seeks for the truth of things and the
right law of action. But even when we act under the influence
of our sattva nature we are not entirely free. Sattva binds
us quite as much as rajas and tamas. Only onr desires for50 The Bhagavadgité

truth and virtue are nobler. The sense of ego is still operative.
We must rise above our ego and grow into the Supreme Self
of which the ego is an expression. When we make our indi-
vidual being one with the Supreme, we ris¢ above nature
with its three modes, become trigunatita,t and freed from
the bonds of the world.

8. Yoga-Sastra

Every system of Indian philosophic thought gives us a
practical way of reaching the supreme ideal. Though we
begin with thought, our aim is to go beyond thought to the
decisive experience. Systems of philosophy give not only
metaphysical theories, but also spiritual dynamics. It may
be argued that, if man is a part of the Divine, what he needs
is not redemption as an awareness of his true nature. If he
feels himself a sinner estranged from God, he requires a
technique by which he reminds himself that he is essentially
a part of God and any feeling to the contrary is illusory.
This awareness is not intellectual but integral; so man’s
whole nature requires overhauling, The Bhagavadgita gives
us not only a metaphysics (brahmavidya) but also a dis-
cipline (yogaSastra). Derived from the root, yuj, to bind
together, yoga means binding one’s psychic powers, balancing
and enhancing them.? By yoking together and harnessing
our energies by the most intense concentration of personality,
we force the passage from the narrow ego to the transcendent
personality. The spirit tears itself away from its prison house,
stands out of it and reaches its own innermost being.

The Gita gives a comprehensive yoga-Sastra, large, flexible
and many-sided, which includes various phases of the soul’s
development and ascent into the Divine. The different yogas
are special applications of the inner discipline which leads
to the liberation of the soul and a new understanding of the
unity and meaning of mankind. Everything that is related
to this discipline is called a yoga such as jfiana-yoga or the
way of knowledge, bhakti-yoga or the way of devotion,
karma-yoga or the way of action.

1 XIV, ar. uw

1 It is used in different senses; yujyate etad iti yogah; (ii) yujyate
anena iti yogah: (ii) yujyate tasminn iti yogah.Introductory Essay 5r

Perfection at the human level is a task to be accomplished
by conscious endeavour. The image of God operating in us
produces a sense of insufficiency. Man has a haunting sense
of the vanity, the transience and the precariousness of all
human happiness. Those who live on the surface of life may
not feel the distress, the laceration of spirit, and may not
feel any urge to seek their true good. They are human
animals (purusapasu), and like animals they are born, they
grow, they mate and leave offspring and pass away.
But those who realize their dignity as men are acutely
aware of the discord and seek a principle of harmony and

ce,

Arjuna typifies the representative human soul seeking to
reach perfection and peace but in the opening section we
find that his mind is clouded, his convictions unsettled, his
whole consciousness confused. Life’s anxieties touch him
with a gnawing distress. For every individual there comes an
hour sometime or other, for nature is not in a hurry, when
everything that he can do for himself fails, when he sinks
into the gulf of utter blackness, an hour when he would
give all that he has for one gleam of light, for one sign of
the Divine. When he is assailed by doubt, denial, hatred of
life and black despair, he can escape from them only if God
lays His hand on him. If the divine truth which is free of
access to all mankind, is attained only by a few, it shows
that only a few are willing to pay the price for it. The sense
of insufficiency, of barrenness and dust, is due to the working
of the Perfection, the mystery that lurks at the heart of
creation. The invisible impulse to seek God produces the
agony that inspires heroic idealism and human fulfilment.
The image of God in us expresses itself in the infinite capacity
for self-transcendence.t

1 “There is a principle which is’ pure, placed in the human mind,
which in different places and ages hath had different names; it is,
however, pure and proceeds from God. It is deep, and inward, con-
fined to no forms of religion, nor excluded from any, where the heart
stands in perfect sincerity. In whomsoever this takes root and grows,
of what nation soever, they become brethren in the best sense of
the expression.” John Woolman, the American Quaker saint.52 The Bhagavadgita

9. Jaana or Saving Wisdom

How is the goal of perfection to be attained? Sarnsara
is historical becoming. It is the temporal’ procession of
changes from one state into the next. What keeps the world
going is action or karma. If the world is nothing but ebb
and flow, continual becoming, it is due to action. At the
‘auman level action is caused by desire or attachment, kama.
The root cause of desire is avidya or ignorance of the nature
of things. The roots of desire lie in the ignorant belief in the
individual’s self-sufficiency, in the attribution of reality and
permanence to it. So long as ignorance persists, it is not
possible to escape from the vicious circle of becoming. We
cannot cure desires by fresh desires; we cannot cure action
by more action. The eternal cannot be gained by that which
is temporal.t Whether we are bound by good desires or bad
desires, it is still a question of bondage. It makes little dif-
ference whether the chains which bind us are made of gold
or of iron, To escape from bondage we must get rid of
ignorance, which is the parent of ignorant desires-and so
of ignorant actions. Vidya or wisdom is the means of libera-
tion from the chain of avidya-kama-karma.

Wisdom is not to be confused with theoretical learning
or correct beliefs, for ignorance is not intellectual error. It
is spiritual blindness. To remove it, we must cleanse the soul
of its defilement and kindle the spiritual vision. The fire of
passion and the tumult of desire must be suppressed.? The
mind, inconstant and unstable, must be steadied so as to
reflect the wisdom from above. We must control the senses,
possess the faith which no intellectual doubts disturb arid
train the understanding (buddhi).3

Wisdom is direct experience which occurs as soon as
obstacles to its realization are removed. The effort of the
seeker is directed to the elimination of the hindrances, to
the removal of the obscuring tendencies of avidya. Accord-
ing to Advaita Vedanta, this wisdom is always present. It
is not a thing to be acquired; it has only to be revealed.
Our casual apprehensions, backed by our wishes and pre-
judices, do not reveal reality. Utter silence of the mind and

* Katha Up., Il, 10. IV, 39. 4 IL, 44.Introductory Essay 53

the will, an emptying of the ego produces illumination,
wisdom, the light by which we grow into our true being.
This is life eternal, the complete fulfilment of our capacity
of love and knowledge, ‘‘the completely simultaneous and
perfect possession of unlimited life at a single moment,” to
use the words of Boethius.

Jiiana and ajfiana, wisdom and ignorance are opposed as
light: and darkness.1 When wisdom dawns, ignorance dies
and the evil is cut off at the root. The liberated soul over-
comes the world. There is nothing to conquer or create.
Action no more binds. When we grow into this wisdom, we
live in the Supreme.? This consciousness is not an abstract
one. It is ‘that by which thou shalt see all existences without
exception in the Self, then in Me.”’ The true human indi-
vidual pursues this ideal of perfection with a devotion similar
to that which he offers to an adored woman.3

to. The Way of Knowledge: Jidna-marga

‘We can reach the goal of perfection, attain the saving
truth in three different ways, by a knowledge of Reality
(jfiana) or adoration and love (bhakti) of the Supreme
Person or by the subjection of the will to the Divine purpose
(karma). These are distinguished on account of the distri-
bution of emphasis on the theoretical, emotional and practi-
cal aspects. Men are of different types, reflective, emotional
or active but they are not exclusively so. At the end, know-
ledge, love and action mingle together. God Himself is sat,
cit and ananda, reality, truth and bliss To those seeking
knowledge, He is Eternal Light, clear and radiant as the sun
at noonday, in which is no darkness; to those struggling
for virtue, He is Eternal Righteousness, steadfast and impar-
tial; and to those emotionally inclined, He is Eternal Love
and Beauty of Holiness. Even as God combines in Himself
these features, man aims at the integtal life of spirit. Cog-
nition, will and feeling, though logically distinguishable, are

Svarispajiana or the Real as consciousness always is. Its constant
esence does not dispel, according to Advaita Vedanta, ajfana or
ignorance. It rather reveals it. Wisdom as saksdthara is a vy{ti and
so an effect like any other kind of jfiana.
* V, 20. 3 mublikanta,54 The Bhagavadgita
not really separable in the concrete life and unity of mind.
They are different aspects of the one movement of the soul.

Jfiana as the intellectual pathway to perfection is different
from jiiana as spiritual wisdom. The spiritual apprehension
of the real is not an act of service or of devotion or for that
matter, of cognition, however much these acts may lead up
to it. As the same word ‘‘jfiana” is employed for both the
goal of perfection and the way to it, for the recognition of
teality as well as the scheme of spiritual knowledge, some
are Jed to think that the intellectual path is superior to the
other methods of approach.

Wisdom, pure and transcendent, is different from scientific
knowledge, though it is not. discontinuous from it. Every
science expresses, after its own fashion, within a certain order
of things, a reflection of the higher immutable truth of which
everything of any reality necessarily partakes. Scientific or
discriminative knowledge prepares us for the higher wisdom.
The partial truths of science are different from the whole
truth of spirit. Scientific knowledge is useful since it dispels
the darkness oppressing the mind, shows up the incomplete-
ness of its own world and prepares the mind for something
beyond it. For knowing the truth, we require a conversion
of the soul, the development of spiritual vision. Arjuna could
not see the truth with his naked eyes and so was granted
the divine sight.

* Cp. Plotinus: “There are different roads by which this end (of
spiritual apprehension) may be reached; the love of beauty which which
exalts the poet; that devotion to the one and that ascent
which make the ambition of the philosopher; that love and those
prayers by which some devout and ardent soul tends in its moral
purity towards perfection, These are the great highways conducting
to that height above the actual and the particular, where we stand
in the immediate presence of the Infinite, who shines out as from
the deeps of the soul.” Letter to Flaccus.

Madhusidana holds that to attain the perfect Godhead who is of
the nature of Being, Wisdom and Bliss, the Vedas are of three sections,
dealing with action, worship and knowledge; similarly these three
sections are embodied in the eighteen chapters of the Gitd.

saccidanandaviparh tat pirnam visnoh param padam,
yat praptaye samavabdha vedah kand utrayatmikah,
harmopdstis tatha jaidnam 1h kdndatrayam hramdt,
tadriipa’ astadasadhytyair gita handatrayatmikd,Introductory Essay 55

Ascent to higher levels of being, losing oneself to find the
higher self can be achieved through jijfiasa or disinterested
passion for knowledge. It lifts man out of his narrow limits
and makes him forget his self in the contemplation of the
universal principles of existence. Knowledge pursued for the
sake of power or fame does not take us far. It must be
sought for attaining truth.

The metaphysical creed accepted by the Gita with certain
fundamental modifications is that of the Sarmkhya philo-
sophy. Profound faith in God and belief in redemption require
us to assume three entities, the soul which has to be re-
deemed, the fetter which binds it, from which it has to be
redeemed, and God, the Being who releases us from this
bondage. The Sarhkhya philosophy elaborates the dualism
between purusa (self) and prakrti (not-self); only the Gita
makes them both subordinate to God. The selves are many
and remain for ever separate. The self is the permanent
entity behind all the changes of conscious life. It is not the
soul in the usual sense but the pure, inactive, self-luminous
principle, which is not derived from or dependent on or
determined by the world. It is unique and integral. Man is
not self but possesses self and can become self. Not-self or
prakrti is another ultimate principle which is conceived as
being at first undifferentiated matter with all its con-
stituents in equilibrium. As such, it is the unmanifested or
the avyakta. All mental and material phenomena are ex-
plained as the outcome of the evolution of prakrti. It has
three modes or gunas, literally strands of a rope. These, by
appearing in different proportions, produce the variety of
actual existence. With reference to matter, they act as light-
ness (sativa), moyement (rajas) and heaviness (tamas). As
forms of mental phenomena, they act as goodness, passion
and dullness respectively. When the self realizes that it is
free from all contact with prakrti, it is released. The Gita
accepts this account with the fundamental modification that
the dualities of Sarhkhya, purusa and prakrti, are the very
nature of the Supreme Principle, God.

Evil is caused by the bondage to the gunas. It arises
because the seed of life or the spirit cast into matter becomes
fettered by the gunas. According to the preponderance of56 The Bhagavadgita

one or the other of the gunas the soul rises or falls. When
we recognize the self as distinct from prakrti with its gunas,
we are released. Metaphysical knowledge is transformed into
realization? by means of yoga or the method of concentra-
tion. From the earliest times, yoga has been employed to
describe practices and experiences of a special kind which
have been later adapted to the teachings of the different
methods, jfiana, bhakti and karma. Each of them uses the
practices of dhyinayoga or the way of meditation. Yoga is
the suppression of the activities of the mind, according to
Patafijali3 Maitrt Up. says, “As fire deprived of fuel is
extinguished in its own hearth, so when mental activities
are suppressed (vyttiksayat), citta is extinguished in its own
seat.’’4 It is by a mighty exercise of will that we can achieve
this suppression of the clamour of ideas and of the rabble
of desires. By ceaseless action the yogi is called upon to
achieve control.5

Man knows only a part of his being, his surface mentality.
There is a good deal beneath the surface of which he has no
knowledge though it has effects on his conduct. We are some-
times completely overcome by emotions, instinctive and
involuntary reactions that upset the rule of conscious reason.
While the lunatic is completely overcome by them, many
of us are also subject to their influence, though such con-
ditions are temporary with normal individuals. Under the
stress of strong emotions of love or of hatred, we say or do
things which we regret afterwards when we regain control.
Our language, “‘He is beside himself,” ‘‘He forgot himself,”
“He is not himself,” suggests the truth of the primitive view
that the man who is overcome by a strong emotion is pos-
sessed by a devil or a spirit.6 When strong emotions are
aroused, we become increasingly suggestible and all sorts of
wild ideas take possession of us. Normally the subconscious
collaborates with the conscious and we do not even suspect

* paroksajitana. 2 aparoksabrahmasaksathara.

3 yogas cittavrttinirodhah. 4 VIL, 34. citlam svayonau upasamyate.

5 nirvikarena karmana. Harivamsa. XI, 736.

6 “Fascination, bewitchment, loss of soul, possession and so on
are clearly phenomena of dissociation, repression and suppression

of consciousness by unconscious contents.” Jung: The Integration of
the Personality. E.T. (1940), p. 12.Introductory Essay 57

its presence but if we get off the track of our original instinc-
tive pattern, we realize the full force of the subconscious.
Unless the individual has complete self-awareness, he cannot
become master of his life. Besides, body, life and mind require
to be integrated. As a selfconscious being, man is actually
aware of the deeper discords in him. He generally resorts
to working compromises and leads a precarious life. But until
a perfect harmony, an organic balance, of his many-sided
possibilities is achieved, he is not fully master of himself.
The process of integration is never completed, so long as he
is subject to temptations as Arjuna was. A growing per-
sonality requires unceasing care and fostering. By developing
purity of intention, passions directed towards mundane
objects die, producing tranquillity of mind which in turn
gives rise to the inward silence in which the soul begins to
establish contact with the Eternal from which it is sundered,
and experience the presence of the Indwelling God. In still-
ness which is the rest of the soul from earthly encounter,
insight is born and man becomes what he is.

Our consciousness when united with the body is turned
outward in order to accomplish its work of controlling the
outer world by means of the senses: In its outward function-
ing, it employs concepts to achieve an understanding of the
sensible. By turning inward, it normally gets an inferential
apprehension of the self, through the acts which are appre-
hended immediately, in the sense that the objects appre-
hended are known by no other intermediary than the
apprehension itself. All this does not tell us what the self,
in its essential nature, is, We know about the phenomena
of the self but not of the self itself. To get at the existential
experience of the self, we should get free from the diversity
of objects, external and internal, which impedes and prevents
the direct or intuitive vision of the essence of the self. Nor-
mally, the phenomenal content, external and internal, occu-
pies the stage and the self is not perceived in its essentiality.
The more we obscure ourselves psychologically, that is,
through introspection or reflection, the more are we in con-
tact with the phenomenal manifestations of the self. We
should adopt a different discipline, if we are to confront the
Supreme Self in us. We must fold up the phenomenal series,58 The Bhagavadgita

go against the grain of our nature, strip ourselves naked,
escape from the apparent ego and get at the abyss of pure
subjectivity, the Absolute Self.

The Bhagavadgité describes to us how the aspirant avoids

lily excesses of indulgence or abstinence, goes to a place
free from external distractions, chooses a comfortable seat,
regulates his breathing, focuses his mind on one point and
becomes harmonized (yukta) and detached from all desire
for the fruit of action. When he attains this unity, he arrives
at a perfect understanding with his fellow beings through
sympathy and love and not because it is a matter of duty.
We have the example of Gautama the Buddha, the greatest
jini or seer whose love for humanity led to his ministry
of mankind for forty years. To know the truth is to lift up
our hearts to the Supreme and adore Him. The knower is
also a devotee and the best of them.'

The systematic cultivation of yoga results incidentally. in
the development of supernatural powers but to practise yoga
for the sake of obtaining these powersis vain and futile. Often
it results in neurosis and failure. The aspirant for spiritual
life is warned about the attraction of the supernatural
powers. They may lead us to worldly advancement but are
not directed to saintliness. They are spiritually meaningless
and irrelevant. The occultist, who is able to see hyper-
physical spheres, has developed certain potentialities which
put him above the ordinary human beihgs even as those
who are familiar with modern technology are better equipped
than the primitive peasants. But the advance is in the exter-
nal direction and not in the .interiorization of the soul. Yoga
is to be practised for the sake of attaining truth, of gaining
contact with Reality, Krsna is the lord of yoga (yogeSvara)* who
helps us in our life to'save ourselves. He is the supreme lord of
spiritual experience who conveys those moments of celestial
glory when man gets beyond the veil of the flesh and also
indicates their true relation to the problems of-daily existence.

11,. The Way of Devotion: Bhakti-marga
hakti or devotion is a relationship of trust and love to
a personal God. Worship of the unmanifested (avyaktopasana)
© VILA7. > XVII, 78.Introductory Essay 59

is difficult for ordinary human beings, though there are
instances of great advaitins (non-dualists) who have given to
the Impersonal Reality a warm emotional content.t Worship
of the Personal God is recommended as the easier way open
to all, the weak and the lowly, the illiterate and the ignorant.
The sacrifice of love is not so difficult as the tuning of the ,
~will to the Divine purpose orascetic discipline or the strenuous
\ effort of thinking.

The origin of the way of devotion is hidden in the mists
of long ago. The praises and prayers of the Rg. Veda, the
upasanas of the Upanisads and the ardent piety of the
Bhagavata religion influenced the author of the Gia. He
struggles to develop an order of ideas belonging to the
religious side of the Upanisads to which they, were not able
to give free and unambiguous utterance. The Supreme is
not a God who sleeps in serene abstraction while hearts
heavy, laden cry out for help, but a saving God of love
believed and experienced as such by the devotee. He
bestows salvation on those who believe in Him. He declares:

1 The devotees dismiss the Advaita emphasis on knowledge as
a damnable heresy or a soul-killing error, though §. recognizes the
value of devotion as a preparation for gradual release.

2 IX, 32; see also XI, 53-4; XII, 1-5. ‘What were the good
practices of Vyadha? What was the age of Dhruva? What was the
learning of Gajendra? What was the prowess of Ugrasena? What
was the beauty of Kubji? What was the wealth of Sudima? The
Lord, who is the lover of devotion, is pleased with devotion and
does not bother about (other) qualities.”

wyddhasyacaranam, dhruvasya ca vayo, vidya gajendrasya ka,

ha jatir vidurasya, yadavapater ugrasya kim paurusam,

hubjayah hamaniyaripamadhikam hirn tat sudamno dhanam
*  bhaktya tusyati hevalam na tu gunaih bhakti priyo madhavah.

A verse attributed to §. reads: “Let the state of birth be that
of a man or an angel or of a beast of the hill and the forest, of a
mosquito, of the cattle, of an insect, of a bird or such others, if the
heart longs to revel incessantly in this life in the contemplation of
Thy lotus feet, that flood of supreme bliss, how does the embodiment
matter?”

navatuar devatvarh nagavanamygatvam masakata pasutvam hitatvarn

bhavatu vihagatuadi jananam

sada —_tvatpadabjasmaranaparamanandalaharivihdrasaktam ced

hydayam tha kirh tena vapusa.
This is rather an exaggerated way of emphasizing the importance
of bhakti.00 The Bhagavadgita

“This is my word of promise, that He who loveth me shall
not perish.’

Bhakti is derived from the root, bhaj, to serve, and means
service of the Lord. It is loving attachment to God. Narada
defines it as intense love for God.? For Sandilya, it is supreme
longing for God,3 for its own sake.4 It is surrender in trusting
appropriation of the grace of the Lord. It is iSvarapranidhana
of Yoga Siitra, which, according to Bhoja, is ‘‘the love in
which, without seeking results, such as sense enjoyment, etc.,
all works are dedicated to the teacher of teachers.’’s It is
a profound experience which negates all desire and fills the
heart with love for God.6 Advocates of the way of devotion
are not interested so much in supramundane redemption as
in absolute subjection to the abiding will of God. The
human soul draws near to the Divine by contemplation of
God’s power, wisdom and goodness, by constant remem-

‘ brance of Him with a devout heart, by conversing about His
qualities with others, by singing His praises with fellow men
and by doing all acts as His service.7 The devotee directs
his whole being to God. Adoration is the essence of religion.
It involves a duality between the worshipper and the wor-
shipped. If a philosophy of immanentism is so interpreted
as to destroy man’s sense of creatureliness or God’s trans-

+ IX, 31. 2 paramapremariipa.

3 sd pavanuraktir isvare. I, 1, 2.

4 nivhetuka. Cp. Bhagavaia: ahetukavyavahita y& bhaktih purusot-
tame: see also B.G., XII, 5; IX, 17-18.

Cp. Caitanya: “I desire not, O Lord, wealth or retinue or a
beautiful woman or poetic genius; I pray for spontaneous devotion
to the Supreme in every birth of mine.”

na dhanam na janam sundavin kavitam va jagadisa kimaye ,
mama janmani-janmant’Svare bhavatad bhaktir ahastuki tuayi.
Siksastaka, 4.

5 I, 23. It is buddhanusmyti of Mahavastu.

© Cp. Narada: Bhakti Sitra 54; gunarahitarm, kamandrahitam,
pratiksanavardhamanam, avicchinnam, siksmataram; anubhavariipam.

7 Narada Sitva, 16-18, The Bhagavata describes the nine stages
of bhakti:

Sravanam kirtanam visnok, smaranarh padasevanam
arcanars, vandanarn, dasyam, sakhyam, &tmanivedanam.’

Again: “I abide not in heaven nor in the hearts of yogis; I dwell
where My devotees sing My glory.” ,

nahash vasdmi vaikunthe, yogindm hrdaye na ca
madbhahta yatra gayanti tatra tisthami narada.Introductory Essay 61

cendence, it has no place for devotion and worship. The
distinction between creature and creator is the ontological
basis of the religion of bhakti. The Eternal One is viewed
in the Bhagavadgita not so much as the God of philosophical
speculation as the God of grace such as the heart and the
soul need and seek, who inspires personal trust and love,
reverence and loyal self-surrender. ‘‘Before the rise of know-
ledge, duality is misleading but when our understanding is
enlightened, we perceive that duality is more beautiful than
even non-duality and is conceived so that there might be
worship.”’t Again, “The truth is non-duality; but duality is
for the sake of worship; and thus, this worship is a hundred
times greater than liberation.’

Bhakti, in the Gita, is not an amor intellectualis which is
more reflective and contemplative. It is sustained by know-
ledge but is not knowledge. It involves no reference to yoga
technique or longing for speculative knowledge of the Divine:
Sandilya argues that it gives us spiritual peace even without
knowledge as in the case of milkmaids.3 The devotee has a
sense of utter humility. In the presence of the Ideal, he feels
that he is nothing. God loves meekness,+ the utter prostra-
tion of the self.

As a rule, the particular qualities associated with bhakti,
love and devotion, mercy and tenderness are to be found
morein women than in men. As bhakti emphasizes humility,
obedience, readiness to serve, compassion and gentle love, as
the devotee longs to surrender himself, renounce self-will and
experience passivity it is said to be more feminine in character.
Women expect, suffer, hope and receive. They long for com-
passion, mercy, peace. Femininity is in all beings. In the
Bhagavata, it is said that the girls prayed to the Supreme
Goddess, Katyayani, to get for them Krsna as their husband.s
When they are most truly themselves, women give everything,

1 dvaitar mohaya bodhat prag jate bodhe manisaya
bhaktyartham kalpitam duattam advaitad api sundaram,
2 pavamarthikam advaitam dvaitam bhajanahetave
tadrisi yadi bhaktih syat sa tu muktisatadhika.
3 ata eva tad abhavad vallavinam,
4 dainyapriyatvam. Navada Siitra, 27.
5 katydyani mahamaye mahayoginy adhisvari
nandagopasutarn devi patin me kuru te nama.
-» 22, 4.62 The Bhagavadgita

claim nothing; they want to love and be loved. Radha
typifies the loving soul. In relation to God, bhaktas are 1nore
like women. ‘‘The Supreme Lord is the only man; all others
from Brahm’ downwards are like women (who long to be
united with Him).”:

When the soul surrenders itself to God, He takes up our
knowledge and our error and casts away all forms of in-
sufficiency and transforms all into His infinite light and the
purity of the universal good. Bhakti is not merely the ‘‘flight
of the alone to the Alone,” the soul’s detachment from the
world and attachment to God, but is active love for the
Divine who enters into the world for redeeming it.

The view that we cannot win the grace of the Lord by our
own efforts results in an intense emotional pietism. While
bhakti requires faith and love, in prapatti we simply sur-
render ourselves to God, place ourselves in His hands leaving
it to Him to deal with us as He elects. It stresses the simple
and austere purity of the relationship of surrender in a
humble and direct attitude of trust. It perceives genuine
piety in the completeness of the surrender rather than in
the intensity of the bhakti discipline. When we are emptied
of our self, God takes possession of us. The obstacles to this
God-possession are our own virtues, pride, knowledge, our
subtle demands and our unconscious assumptions and pre-
judices. We must empty ourselves of all desires and wait in
trust on the Supreme Being. To fit God’s pattern, all our claims
are to be surrendered.? The difference between bhakti and
prapatti is symbolized by the ape way (markatakisoranyaya)
and thécat way (marjarakisoranyaya). The young ape clings fast
to the mother and is saved. A little effort on the part of
the young is called for. The mother cat takes the young in
her mouth. The young one does nothing to secure its safety.
In bhakti the grace of God is earned to an extent ; in prapatti
it is freely bestowed. There is no reference in the latter to
one’s own worthiness or the service performed.3 This view
finds support in the earlier tradition, ‘“When alone this Self

1 sa eva vasudevo’sau saksat purusa ucyate,
striprayam itavat sarvam jagad brahmapurassaram.’

2 XVIII, 66.

3 prapatti has the following accessories: good will to all (dnu-
hillyasya samkalpah) ; (ii) absence of ill will (pratikulyasya varjanam;Introductory Essay 63

chooses, by him can He be reached, to hinr the Self shows
His form.”! Arjuna is told that the Divine Form was revealed
to him by the grace of the Lord. Again, it is said, ‘From
Me are memory and knowledge as well as their loss.”3 Even
Sarnkara admits that the Supreme alone can grant us the
saving wisdom.4 The distinction of prapatti and bhakti
relates to the issue in Christian thought which is as old as
St. Augustine and Pelagius, whether man as a fallen creature
is to be saved only by the grace of God or whether he can
make something of himself and contribute by his own effort
to his salvation.

Pelagius believed in free will, questioned the doctrine of
original sin and asserted that men acted of their own moral
effort. Augustine disputed the Pelagian theory and taught
that Adam before the Fall had possessed free will, but after
he and Eve ate the apple, corruption entered into them
and descended to all their posterity. None of us can abstain
from sin of our own power. Only God’s grace can help us to
be virtuous, Since we have all sinned in Adam, we are all
condemned in him. Yet by God’s free grace some of us are
elected for heaven, not because we deserve it or we are good
but because God’s grace is bestowed on us. No reason except
God’s unmotived choice can be given as to why: some are
saved and others damned. Damnation proves God’s justice
because we are all wicked. St. Paul, in some passages of the

(iii) faith that the Lord will protect (raksisyatiti visvasah); (iv) resort
to Him as saviour (gopiytvavaranam); (v) a sense of utter helpless-
ness (kdrpanyam); (vi) complete self-surrender (dtmaniksepah). The
last is traditionally regarded as equivalent to prapaiti, which is the
end and aim, agin while the remaining five are accessories, aigas.
Cp. the statement sadvidhd Saranagatih which is explained on the
analogy of astaviga-yoga where samadhi is really the end and the other
seven are aids to it.
1 Katha Up., I, 23. 2 XI, 47. 3 XV, 15.
4 tad anugrahahetukenaiva ca vijfidnena moksasiddhir bhavitum
arhati S.B The first verse of the Avadhiita Gita reads:
isvardnugrahad eva pursam advaitavdsand
mahadbhayaparitranat viprandm upajayate
“It is only with the grace of God that in men with knowledge is
born the inclination for nondual experience which protects them
from great danger.” Another reading for the second line is mahabhaya-
paritrand dvitranam upajayate.64 The Bhagavadgita

Epistle to the Romans, St. Augustine and Calvin adopt the
view of universal guilt. That in spite of it some of us are
saved shows God’s mercy. Damnation and salvation both
manifest the goodness of God, his justice or mercy. The Gita
is inclined to the Pelagian doctrine.

Man’s effort is involved in the total surrender to the
Supreme. It cannot be unintentional or effortless. The doctrine
of grace is not to be interpreted as one of special election,
as such a conception conflicts with the general trend of the
Gitg that the Supreme is ‘‘the same to all beings.”

-Faith (graddha) is the basis of bhakti. So the gods in
whom people have faith are tolerated. Some love is better
than none, for if we do not love we becomé’ shut up withiri
ourselves. Besides, the lower gods are accepted as forms of
the One Supreme.? There is insistence on‘the fact that, while
other devotees reach other ends, only he who is devoted
to the Supreme reaches infinite bliss.3 So’long as worship
is done with devotion, it purifies the heart and prepares the
mind for the higher consciousness. Every one, shapes God
in the likeness of his longing. For the dying, He is ever-
lasting life, for those who grope in the dark, He is the light.
Even as the horizon remains at a level with our eyes, how-
ever high we may climb, the nature of God cannot be higher
than the level of our consciousness. In the lower stages we
pray for wealth and life and the Divine is regarded as the
provider of material needs. Later it ‘is meditation where we
identify ourselves with the good cause which is God’s cause.
In the highest stages, God is the fina] satisfaction, the other
which completes and fulfils the human spirit. Madhusiidana
defines bhakti as a mental state-in which the mind moved
by an ecstasy of love assumes the shape of God.s When

: TK 29 29; cp. Yogavasistha. II, 6, 27. .

a

3 VI, ah. Madhva comments ‘ ‘antobrahmads bhaktanarh madbha-
hiinim anantata.

«Cp. rujasu nathah paramarh hi bhesajam tamah pradipo visamesu

sagtkvamals
bhayesu raksa vyasanesu bandhavo bhavaty agadhe visayambhasi

plavah.
§ dravibhavapiirvika ht manaso bhagavadakarata savikatpaka
uptiriipa bhaktib.Iniroductory Essay 65

the emotional attachment to God becomes highly ecstatic,
the devout lover forgets himself in God.t Prahlada in whom
we find the spiritual condition of complete concentration
in God expresses his unity with the Supreme Person. Such
self-forgetful ecstatic experiences cannot be regarded as
supporting advaita metaphysics. In aparoksdnubhava or the
ultimate state in which the individual is absorbed in the
Absolute, the separate individual as such does not survive.
Bhakti leads to jfiana or wisdom. For Ramanuja, it is
stiytisantana. Even prapatti is a form of jfiana. When the
devotion glows, the Lord dwelling in the soul imparts to the
devotee by His grace the light of wisdom. The devotee feels
united intimately with the Supreme, who is experienced as
the being in whom all antitheses vanish. He sees God in
himself and himself in God. Prahlada says that the supreme
end for man is absolute devotion to God and a feeling of
His presence everywhere.? ‘‘For her who loves, it is the same
whether she, in the ardour of love, plays on the bosom of
the lover or whether she caresses with tenderness his feet.
Thus to him who knows, whether he remain in a super-
conscious ecstasy or serves God with worship, the two are
the same.’’3 For the devotee, the higher freedom is in sur-
render to God.4 Participation in God’s work for the world
is the duty of all devotees.s ‘Those who give up their duties
and simply proclaim the name of the Lord, Krsna, Krsna,
are verily the enemies of the Lord and sinners for the very
_ Lord has taken birth for protecting righteousness.” When
the devotee truly surrenders himself to the Divine, God
1 “The Vrsnis . . . lost themselves in thought about Krsna and
completely forgot their own separate existence.” Bhaktiratnavali. 16.
2 ehantabhaktir govinde yat sarvatva tad iksanam. Bhagavata vu,
7, priyatamahydaye va khelatu premaritya,
padayugaparicaryam preyast va vidhattam
viharatu viditartho nirvikalpe samadhau
nanu bhajanavidhau vd tulyam etad dvaym asyat.
4 linata haripadabje muktir ity abhidhiyate.
5 Cp. Majjhima Nikaya: yo mam passati sa dhammam passati, He
who sees me sees dharma.
6 svadharmakarmavimukhah krsnakrsnetivadinah
te harer dvesino midhah dharmarthask janma yadd hareh.
Visnu Purana, See also B.G., 1X, 30; cp. I John ii, 9-11, iv, 18-20;
ep. “Not everyone that calls ‘Christ’ Lord, but he that does the will
of the Father, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven.”66 The Bhagavadgita

becomes the ruling passion of his mind, and whatever the
devotee does, he does for the glory of God. Bhakti, in the
Bhagavadgita, is an utter self-giving to the Transcendent.
It is to believe in God, to love Him, to be devoted to Him,
to enter into Him, It is its own reward. Such a devotee has
in him the content of the highest knowledge as well as the
energy of the perfect man.*

12. The Way of Action: Karma-marga

In determining the purpose of any treatise, we must see
the question with which it opens (upakrama) and the con-
clusion to which it leads (upasarnhara). The Gita opens with
a problem. Arjuna refuses to fight and raises difficulties.
He puts up a plausible plea for abstention from activity
and for retreat from the world, an ideal which dominated
certain sects at the time of the composition of the Gita.
To convert him is the purpose of the Gia. It raises the
question whether action or renunciation of action is better
and concludes that action is better. Arjuna declares that his
perplexities are ended and he would carry out the command
to fight. Right through, the teacher emphasizes the need
for action. He does not adopt the solution of dismissing the
world as an illusion and action as a snare. He recommends
the full active life of man in the world with the inner life
anchored in the Eternal Spirit. The Gi/a is therefore a man-
date for action. It explains what a man ought to do not
merely as a social being but as an individual with a spiritual
destiny. It deals fairly with the spirit of renunciation as well
as with the ceremonial piety of the people which are worked
into its code of ethics.3 The Sarnkhya, which is another name

« Bhagavata says that “devotion directed to Lord Vasudeva
produces soon dispassion and wisdom by which the vision of the
Supreme is obtained.”

vasudeve bhagavati bhaktiyogah prayojitah
janayaty Gu vairagyarn jianam yad brahmadarsanam.
Cp. vimalamatirvimatsarah prasantah sucarito’khilasattvamurabhiitah
priyahitavacano’ stamanam@yo vasatt sada hydi yasya vasudevah.
Visnu Purana, IIL, 7.
2 IL, 18, 37; III, 19; IV, 15; VII, 7; XI, 33; XVI, 24; XVIII, 6; 72
3 Cp. M.B., Santiparva, 348, 53.
yatinars capi yo dharmah sa te pirvarn nypottama
kathito harigitasu samasa vidht kalpitah.Introductory Essay 67

for jfiana in the Gita, requires us to renounce action. There
is the well-known view that created beings are bound by
karma or action and are saved by knowledge.t Every deed,
whether good or bad produces its natural effect and involves
embodiment in the world and is an obstacle to liberation.
Every deed confirms the sense of egoism and separateness
of the doer, and sets in motion a new series of effects,
Therefore, it is argued, one must renounce all action and
become a sarhnydsin. Sarhkara, who upholds the method of
jfidna as a means of salvation, argues that Arjuna was a
madhyamadhikari for whom renunciation was dangerous and
so he was advised to take to action. But the Gita adopts the
view developed in the Bhagavata religion which has the
twofold purpose of helping us to obtain complete release
and do work in the world. In two places, Vyasa tells Suka
that the most ancient method of the Brahmin is to obtain
release by knowledge and perform actions.3 Iga Up. adopts
a similar view. It is incorrect to assume that Hindu thought
strained excessively after the unattainable and was guilty
of indifference to the problems of the world. We cannot lose
ourselves in inner piety when the poor die at our doors, naked
and hungry. The Gita asks us to live in the world and save it.

‘The teacher of the Gita points out the extreme subtlety
of the problem of action, gahana karmano gatih.s It is not
possible for us to abstain from action. Nature is ever at work
and we are deluded if we fancy that its process can be held
up. Nor is cessation from action desirable. Inertia is not
freedom. Again, the binding quality of an action.does not
Tie in its mere performance but in the motive or desire that
prompts it. Renunciation refers, not to the act itself but to the

‘ karmand badhyate jantur, vidyayd tu pramucyats. M.B.,
Santiparva, 240, 7.
2 ndrayanaparo dharmah punaravrttidurlabhah
pravrttilaksanascaiva dharmo ndrayanatmakah.
M.B., Santiparva, 247, 80-1.
Again pravyttilaksanam dharmarh rsw narayano'bravit. ibid., 217 2.
3 esd pirvatara uyttiy brahmanasya vidhiyate
iManavan eva karmani kurvan sarvatra siddhyatt.
M.B., Santiparva, 237, 13 234, 29.
See also léa Up., 2, and Visnu Purana, VI, 6, 12.
IV, 17.68 The Bhagavadgita

frame of mind behind the act. Renunciation means absence
of desire. So long as action is based on false premises, it binds
the individual soul. If our life is based on ignorance, however
altruistic our conduct may be, it will be binding. The Gia ad-
vocates detachment from desiresand not cessation from work.!

When Krsna advises Arjuna to fight, it does not follow
that he is supporting the validity of warfare. War happens
to be the occasion which the teacher uses to indicate the
spirit in which all work including warfare will have to be
performed. Arjuna takes up a pacifist attitude and declines
to participate in a fight for truth and justice. He takes a
human view of the situation and represents the extreme of
non-violence. He winds up:

“Better I deem it, if my kinsmen strike,
To face them weaponless, and bare my breast
To shaft and spear, than answer blow with blow.’’

Arjuna does not raise the question of the right or wrong
of war. He has faced many battles and fought many enemies.
He declares against war and its horrors because he has to
destroy his own friends and relations (svajanam).3 It is not
a question of violence or non-violence but of using violence
against one’s friends now turned enemies. His reluctance to
fight is not -the outcome of spiritual development or the
predominance of sattvaguna but is the product of ignorance
and passion.+ Arjuna admits that he is overcome by weak-
ness and ignorance.s The ideal which the Gita sets before
us is ahirhsa or non-violence and this is evident from the
description of the perfect state of miind, speech and body
in Chapter VII, and of the mind of the devotee in Chap-
ter XII. Krsna advises Arjuna to fight without passion or
ill-will, without anger or attachment and if we develop such
a frame of mind violence becomes impossible. We must
fight against what is wrong but if we allow ourselves to
hate, that ensures our spiritual defeat. It is not possible to
kill people in a state of absolute serenity or absorption in

t Asjuna says:

asakiah saktavad gacchan nissango muktabandhanah
Samah Satrau ca mitre ca sa vai mukto maihpate.
M.B., XIT, 18, 31.
+ I, 46, Edwin Arnold's E.T. 84 38 1, 275 1, 375 Le 4B.
4 XVIIL, 7, 8. s Il, 7.Introductory Essay 69

God, War is taken as an illustration. We may be obliged
to do painful work but it should be done in a way that does
not develop the sense of a separate ego. Krsna tells Arjuna
that one can attain perfection even while doing one’s duties.
Action done devotedly and wholeheartedly, without attach-
ment to the results makes for perfection. Our action must
be the result of our nature. While Arjuna is a householder
belonging to the warrior caste, he speaks like a sarinyasin
not because he has risen to the stage of utter dispassion and
love for humanity but because he is overcome by false com-
passion. Everyone must grow upward from the point where
he stands. The emphasis of the Git on lokasarhgraha, world-
solidarity, requires us to change the whole pattern of our
life. We are kindly, decent men who would be shocked and
indignant if a dog is hurt, we would fly to the protection
of a crying child or a maltreated woman and yet we persist
in doing wrong on a large scale to millions of women and
children in the comforting belief that by doing so, we are
doing our duty to our family or city or the state. Fhe
Gita requires us to lay stress on human brotherhood. Where-
ever the imperative to fight is employed, Sarhkara points
out that it is not mandatory (vidhi), but refers only to the
prevailing usage.: The Gita belongs to a period of upheaval
through which humanity periodically passes- in which
intellectual, moral, social and political forms are at strife
and when these are not properly adjusted, violent: con-
vulsions take place. In the conflict between the self-affirming
law of good and the forms that impede it, force is some-
times necessary to give the law of good a chance of becoming a
psychological fact and an historic process, We have toact in the
world as it is, while doing our best to improve it. We should
not be defiled by disgust even when we look at the worst
that life can do to us, even when we are plunged in every kind
of loss, bereavement and humiliation. If we act in the spirit of
the Gita with detachment and dedication, and have love even
for our enemy, we will help to rid the world of wars.+
* tasmad yuddhasvety anuvadamitvam, na vidhib; na hyatra
yuddhakartavyata vidhtyate. S.B.G., II, 18.
2 Cp. the Vedic prayer: ‘Whatever here is heinous, cruel and sinful,
may all that be stilled, may everything be good and peaceful to us.””
‘yad tha ghoram, yad iha krivam, yad iha papam .
tac chantam tac chivarh sarvam eva sam aftu nah.70 The Bhagavadgita

If we cultivate the spirit of detachment from results and
dedication to God, we may engage in action. One who acts
in this spirit is a perpetual sarnnydsin.* He accepts things
as they come and leaves them without regret, when
necessary.

If there is hostility to the method of works, it is not
hostility to work as such but to the theory of salvation by
works. If ignorance, avidya, is the root evil, wisdom or jfiana
is the sovereign remedy. Realization of wisdom is not what
is accomplished in time. Wisdom is ever pure and perfect
and is not the fruit of an act. An eternal attainment devoid
of change cannot be the result of a temporary act. But karma
prepares for wisdom. In his commentary on Sanatsujatiya,

arhkara says: ‘‘Liberation is accomplished by wisdom, but
wisdom does not spring without the purification of the heart.
Therefore, for the purification of the heart one should per-
form all acts of speech, mind and body, prescribed in the
Srutis and the srhrtis, dedicating them to the Supreme Lord."
Work done in such a spirit becomes a yajfia or sacrifice.
Sacrifice is a making sacred to the Divine. It is not depriva-
tion or self-immolation but a spontaneous self-giving, a
surrender to a greater consciousness of which we are a limi-
tation. By such a surrender, the mind becomes purified of
its impurities and shares the power and knowledge of the
Divine. Action performed in the spirit of a yajfia or sacrifice
ceases to be a source of bondage.

The Bhagavadgita gives us a religion by which the rule
of karma, the natural order of deed and consequence, can
be transcended. There is no element of caprice or arbitrary
interference of a transcendent purpose within the natural
order. The teacher of the Gita recognizes a realm of reality
where karma does not operate and if we establish our rela-
tions with it, we are free in our deepest being. The chain
of karma can be broken here and now, within the flux

1, 3: ep. also Yayfavalkya Smyt: where, after an account ot
the state of the renouncer (sarnnyasin) it is said, that even the house-
holder who is a devotee of knowledge and speaks the truth attains
release (without taking satanydsa). III, 204-5.

2 gidnenaiva moksah siddhyati himhtu tad eva jAdnam sattvasuddhim
vind notpadyate . . . tasmat saitvasuddhyartharn sarvesvavam uddisya
sarvani vanmanahkayalaksanani srautasmartani harmani samdcaret.Introductory Essay 91

of the empirical world. We become masters of karma by
developing detachment and faith in God.

For the wise sage who lives in the Absolute, it is con-
tended that nothing remains to be done, tasyakdryam
na vidyate.t The seer of truth has no longer the ambition
to do or to achieve. When all desires are destroyed, it is
not possible to act. Uitaragitd states the objection thus: ‘‘For
the yogi who has become accomplished as the result of having
drunk the nectar of wisdom, no further duty remains; if any
remains, he is not a real knower of truth.” All knowledge,
all striving is a means to attain to this ultimate wisdom,
this last simplicity. Every act or achievement would be less
than this act of being. All action is defective.3

Sarhkara admits that there is no objection to the per-
formance of work until one reaches death, even after the at-
tainment of wisdom.s Such a one is said to be above all duties
only from the theoretical standpoint.’ This means that in
principle there is no contradiction between spiritual freedom
and practical work. Though, strictly speaking, there is nothing
that remains to be done by the wise sage as by God, yet
both of them act in the world, for the sake of world-main-
tenance and progress, lokasarngraha. We may even say that
God is the doer, as the individual has emptied himself of all
desires.6 He does nothing, na ificit karoti. As he has no
ulterior purpose, he lays claim to nothing and surrenders him-

«IIL, 17.

2 jianamrtena typtasya kytakytyasya yoginah
na casti kincit kartavyam asti cen na sa tattvanit.
I, 23.

3 Nyaya Sutra, 1, 1, 18.

4 SB, IL, 3, 32; S.B.G., II, 11; If, 8 and 20. There is a natural
shirking from outward works by those who are afraid of being
distracted from their contemplation of God.

5 alamkaro hy ayam somiarh vad brahmatmavagatau satyain
sarvakartavyatahanih. S.B., I, 1,

6 Jaiminiya Up.: Thou (God) art the doer thereof: fuars vat tasya
kartasi. “We have the mind of Christ” (Cor. ii, 16); “‘I live, yet no
longer I, but Christ liveth in me” (Gal. ii, 20). Tauler: “By their
works they cannot go again. .. . If any man is to come to God, he
must be empty of all works and let God work alone.” Following of
Christ, 16, 17, St. Thomas Aquinas: “The works of a man who is led
by the Holy Ghost are the works of the Holy Ghost rather than his
own.” Summa Theol., II, 1, 93, 6 and 173 The Bhagavadgita

self to spontaneity. Then God acts through him and the ques-
tion of right and wrong does not arise, though it is impossible
for suchaonetodo any wrong." Poisedintheserenity of theSelf,
he becomes the doer of all works, krisnakarmakyt. He knows
that he is only the instrument for the work of God, nimit-
tamatram.2 When the long agony of Arjuna had borne its
fruit, he learned that in God’s will is his peace.3 Under the
control of the Lord, nature (prakrti) carries on its work.
The individual intelligence, mind and senses function for the
great universal purpose and in its light. Victory or defeat
does not disturb, as it is willed by the Universal Spirit.
Whatever happens, the individual accepts without attach-
ment or aversion. He has passed beyond the dualities
(dvandvatita). He does the duty expected of him, kartavyam
karma, without travail and with freedom and spontaneity.
The man of the world is lost in the varied activities of the
world. He throws himself into the mutable world (ksara).
The quietist withdraws into the silence of the Absolute
(aksara) but the ideal man of the Gita goes beyond these
two extremes and. works. like Purusottama.who reconciles
all possibilities in the world without getting involved in it.
He is the doer of works who yet is not the doer, kartaram
akartéram. The Lord is the pattern of an unwearied and
active worker who does not, by His work forfeit His integ-
rity of spirit. The liberated soul is‘eternally free like Krsna
and Janaka.4 Janaka carried on his duties and was not per-

+ Cp. St. John’s words: “Whosoever is born of God doth not
commit sin.”

+ XI, 33.

s XVIIL, 73.

4 Isa Up. asks us to look upon the whole world as dwelling
in the Supreme and to perform actions, as such actions do not bind
us: na harma lipyate nave. Cp.yah kriyavan sa panditah.M.B., Vana-
parva, 312, 108, Anandagiri in his comment on §. on Katha Up., II, 19,
says:

viveki sarvada muktah kurvato nasti havirta
alepavadam aritya srikysna janakau yatha.

In the Adhyatma Ramayana, Rania tells Laksmana: ‘'He who has
fallen in the stream of this world remains unsullied even though
he may outwardly perform all kinds of actions.”.

pravahapatitah karyan kurvann api na
bahye sarvaiva karirivam avahann api raghava.Introductory Essay 73

turbed by the events of the world.t The freed souls work
for the guidance of men who follow the standards set by
the thoughtful. They live in the world but as strangers. They
endure all hardships in the fiesh? and yet they live not after
the flesh. Their existence is on earth but their citizenship
is in heaven. ‘‘As the unlearned act from attachment to their
work, so should the learned also act but without any attach-
ment, with the desire to maintain the world-order.”3

While the Buddhist ideal exalts a life of contemplation,
the Gita attracts all those souls who have a relish for action
and adventure. Action is for self-fulfilment. We must find
out the truth of our own highest and innermost existence

"and live it and not follow any outer standard. Our svadharma,
outward dife, and svabhava, inner being, must answer to each
other. Only then will action be free, easy and spontaneous.
We can live in God’s world as God intends us to live only
by keeping alive the precious unearthly flame of uniqueness.
By placing ourselves in the hands of the Divine, by making
ourselves perfect instruments for His use do we attain the
highest spiritual wisdom.

Karmayoga is an alternative method of approach to the
goal of life according to the Gita and culminates in wisdom.4
In this sense, Sarnkara is correct in holding that karma and
bhakti are means to spiritual freedom. But spiritual freedom
is not inconsistent with activity. Duty as such drops away
but not all activity. The activity of the liberated is free and

~ + “Infinite indeed is my wealth of which nothing is mine. If Mithila,
is burnt, nothing that is mine is burnt.”
anantam buta me vittam yasya me nastt kificana
mithilayam pradiptayim na me hiiicit pradahyate.
M.B., Santiparva, VII, :.
~S. says that the saints, the great ones, live in peace. Like the
spring season, they confer gcod on the world. Themselves having
crossed the mighty ocean of sarhsara, they enable others to cross
the same, with no apparent motive in doing so
$i mahdanto nivasant: santa): vasantaval lokahitam cavantah
firnah svayam bhimabhavarnavam janan ahetunanyanapi tava-
yantah.
2 Cp. Bhagavata: The good people suffer for the sorrows of the
world. prayaso lokatdpena tapyante sadhavo janah. They consume
* themselves in order that they may light the world,
3 III, 25. vIV, 33.74 The Bhagavadgita

spontaneous and not obligatory. They act for the sake of
the welfare of the world even though they have attained
wisdom. Work is not practised as a sadhana but becomes
a laksana, Even when we accept the sarhny4sa asrama, the
duties of the other 4sramas are abandoned but not those of
the sarnnyasa. The common virtues (sadharanadharma) obli-
gatory on all, such as the practice of kindness, are adopted.
So work and liberation are not inconsistent with each other.?

The Gita takes up the various creeds and codes that were
already competing with each other and transforms them into
aspects of a more inward religion, free, subtle, and profound.
If popular deities are worshipped, it must be understood that
they are only varied manifestations of the One Supreme.
If sacrifices are to be offered, they must be of the spirit and
not of material objects. A life of self-control or disinterested
action is a sacrifice. The Veda is of use but it is like a tank
when compared to the widely spreading flood of the teaching
of the Gita. The Gita teaches the doctrine of the Brahman-

' $.B.G., III. 20.

2? Mandana Migra in his Brakmasiddhi mentions seven different
theories about the relation of karma and jfidna, (1) The injunctions
in the ritual part of the Veda tend to turn men away from their
natural activities in the direction of meditative activity enjoined
for the realization of the self. (2) These injunctions are intended
to destroy desires through a process of enjoyment and thus prepare
the way for meditation leading to knowledge of the self. (3) The
performance of karma is necessary to discharge the three debts
(rmatraya) which is the essential prerequisite for self-knowledge.
(4) The activities prescribed have a dual function (sarhyogaprthaktva)
of leading to the fulfilment of desires expected of them and of
preparing for self-knowledge. (5) All karma is intended to purify
men and prepare them for self-knowledge (6) That self-knowledge
is to be regarded as a purificatory aid to the agent, serving the
requirements of the various activities prescribed in the karmakanda.
(7) Karma and jfidna are opposed to each other.

Mandana Misra is inclined to accept the views indicated in 4
and § The performance of rites is a valuable accessory to the
contemplation on the content of verbal knowledge (Sabda jfiana)
arising from the great texts (mahavakyas) of the Upanisads in
bringing about the final manifestation (abhivyakti) of the eternally
self-luminous light of atman. While the sarinyasins reach ‘realization
of self exclusively through contemplative discipline with the per-
formance of scriptural rites, the householders (grhasthas) reach the
goal through the performance of rites, etc.Introductory Essay 5

Atman which the followers of the Upanisads seek and proclaim.
The yoga of concentration is useful but the Supreme is the
Lord of yoga. The dualism of the Sarnkhya is taken over
into non-dualism, for purusa and prakrti are the two natures
of the Supreme Lord, Purusottama. He alone dispenses grace.
He is the true object of devotion. For Him must all work
be done. Saving wisdom is of Him. The traditional rules of
dharma are to be followed because He established them and
He upholds the moral order. The rules are not ends in them-
selves, for union with the Supreme is the final goal. The
teacher of the Gita reconciles the different systems in vogue
and gives us a comprehensive eirenicon which is not local
and temporary but is for all time and all men. He does not
emphasize external forms or dogmatic notions but insists
on first principles and great facts of human nature and being.

13. The Goal: +

The Gita insists on the unity of the life of spirit which
cannot be resolved into philosophic wisdom, devoted love
or strenuous action. Work, knowledge and devotion are
complementary both when we seek the goal and after we
attain it. We do not proceed on the same lines but that
which we seek is the same. We may climb the mountain
by different paths but the view from the summit is identical
for all. Wisdom is personified as a being whose body is know-
ledge and whose heart is love. Yoga, which has for its phases,
knowledge and meditation, love and service is the ancient
xoad that leads from darkness to light, from death to
immortality. -

The goal of transcendence is represented as the ascent
to the world of the Creator (brahmalora), or the attain-
ment of the status of the Impersonal Supreme (brahmabhava
or brahmisthiti). One side of it is isolation from the world
(kaivalya). The Gita mentions all these views. Many passages

‘ The end of perfection 1s called the highest (III, 19), eman-
cipation (III, 31; IV, 15),,the eternal state (XVIII, 56), the path
‘from which there is'no return (V, 17), perfection (XII, ro), the
highest rest (IV, 39), the entering into God (IV, 9, ro and 24),
contact with God (VI, 28), rest in Brahman (II, 72), transformation
into Divine existence (XIV, 26), transmutation into Godhead (V, 24).76 The Bhagavadgita

suggest that, in the state of release, duality disappears and
the released soul becomes one with the Eternal Self. It is a
condition beyond all modes and qualities, impassive, free
and at peace. If we have a body clinging to us, nature will
go on acting till the body is shaken off as a discarded shell.
The jivanmukta or the freed soul possessing the body reacts
to the events of the outer world without getting entangled
in them. On this view, it and body are an unreconciled
duality and we cannot Fink of any ection of the released
soul,

The main emphasis of the Gita is not on such a view. For
it, the state of spiritual freedom consists in the transforma-
tion of our whole nature into the immortal law and power
of the Divine. Equivalence with God (sadharmya) and not
identity (s@yijya) is emphasized. The freed soul is inspired
by Divine knowledge and moved by the Divine will. He
acquires the mode of being (bhava) of God. His purified nature
is assimilated into the Divine substance. Any one who attains
this transcendent condition is a yogin, a siddhapurusa, a
realized soul, a jitatman, a yuktacetas, a disciplined and har-
monized being for whom the Eternal is ever present. He is
released from divided loyalties and actions, His body, mind
andspirit, theconscious, the pre-conscious,and the unconscious,
to use Freud’s words, work flawlessly together and attain
a rhythm expressed in the ecstasy of joy, the illumination
of knowledge and the intensity of energy. Liberation is not
the isolation of the immortal spirit from the mortal human
life but is the transfiguration of the whole man. It is attained
not by destroying but by transfiguring the tension of human
life. His whole nature is subdued to the universal vision,
is wrought to splendour and irradiated by the spiritual light.
His body, life and mind are not dissolved but are rendered
pure and become the means and mould’of the Divine Light,
and he becomes his own masterpiece. His personality is raised
to its fullness, its maximum expression, pure and free,
buoyant and unburdened. All his activities are for the
holding together of the world, cikirser lokasamgraham.* The
liberated souls take upon themselves the burden of the
redemption of the whole world. The end of the dynamic of

« III, 25.Introductory Essay 77

the spirit and its ever new contradictions can only be the
end of the world. The dialectic development cannot stop
until the whole world is liberated from ignorance and evil.
According to the Sarnkhya system, even those persons who
are qualified for the highest wisdom and liberation on account
of their solicitousness for the good of others do not give
up the world. Merging themselves in the body of prakrti
and using its gifts, these prakytilina selves serve the interests
of the world. The world is to move forward to its ideal and
those who are lost in ignorance and bewilderment are to be
redeemed by the effort and example, the illumination and
strength of the freed.t These elect are the natural leaders
of mankind. Anchored in the timeless foundation of our
spiritual existence, the freed soul, the eternal individual works
for the jivaloka ;? while possessing individuality of body, life
and mind he yet retains the universality of spirit. Whatever
action he does, his constant communion with the Supreme
is undisturbed.3 As to what happens if and when the cosmic
process reaches its fulfilment, when universal redemption
takes place, it is difficult for us to say. The Supreme, which
is infinite possibility, may take another possibility for
expression.

The Gita admits that the Real is the absolute Brahman,
but from the cosmic point of view, it is the Supreme Igvara.
The latter is the only way in which man’s thought, limited
as it is, can envisage the highest reality. Though the relation
between the two is inconceivable by us from the logical
standpoint, it is got over when we have the direct appre-
hension of Reality. In the same way, the two views of the
ultimate state of freedom are the intuitional and the intel-
lectual representations of the one condition. The freed spirits
have no need for individuality but still assume it by self-
limitation. Both views agree that so long as the freed spirits
continue to live in the world, they are committed to some
action or other. They work in a freedom of the spirit and
with an inner joy and peace which does not depend on
externals for its source or continuance.

The Gita represents brahmaloka or the world of God, not
as itself the Eternal, but as the farthest limit of manifes-

UIV, 34. + XV, 7. VI, 31.78 The Bhagavadgita

tation. Ananda is the limit of our development and we grow
into it from the level of vijfiana. It belongs to the cosmic
manifestation. The Absolute is not the dnandamaya dtma,
not the divinized self.t The pure Self is different from the
five sheaths, When the purpose of the cosmos is reached,
when the kingdom of God is established, when it is on earth
as it is in heaven, when all individuals acquire the wisdom
of spirit and are superior to the levels of being in which
birth and death take place, then this cosmic process is taken
over into that which is beyond all manifestations.

« Nor is this anandamaya self the Supreme Spirit since it is subject
to conditions and is a modification of prakrti, an effect and the sum

of all the results of good acts. Vivekaciidamamt, 212.
+ paiicakosavilaksanahk. Vivehacudamant, 214-CHAPTER {

The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna

The Question

dhrtarastra uvaca

1. dharmakseive kuruksetre
samaveta yuyuisavah
mamakah pandavas cai va
kim akurvaia samjaya

Dhytarastra said:
(1) In the field of righteousness, the field of the Kurus,
when my people and the sons of Pandu had gathered together,
eager for battle, what did they do, O Sathjaya?

dharmaksetre: in the field of righteousness. The quality of
deciding what is right or dharma is special to man. Hunger, sleep,
fear and sex are common to men and animals. What distinguishes
men from animals is the knowledge of right and wrong.’

The world is dharmaksetra, the battleground for a moral
struggle. The decisive issue lies in the hearts of men where the
battles are fought daily and hourly. The ascent from earth to
heaven, from suffering to spirit, is through the path of dharma.
Even in our corporeal existence, through the practice of dharma,
we can reach up to safety where every difficulty culminates in
joy. The world is dharmaksetra, the nursery of saints where the
sacred flame of spirit is never permitted to go out. It is said to
be karmabhimi where we work out our karma and fulfil the
purpose of soul-making.

The aim of the Gita is not so much to teach a theory as to
enforce practice, dharma. We cannot separate in theory what is
not separable in life. The duties of civic and social life provide
religion with its tasks and opportunities. Dharma is what promotes

* ahavantdrabhayamaithunarh ca samanyam etat pasubhir naranam
dharmo hi tesam adhiko viseso dharmena hinah pasubhif samanah.
Hitopadesa.80 The Bhagavadgita

worldly prosperity and spiritual freedom.t The Git@ does not
teach a mysticism that concerns itself with man’s inner being
alone. Instead of rejecting the duties and relationships of life
as an illusion, it accepts them as opportunities for the realization
of spiritual freedom. Life is offered to us that we may transfigure
it completely.

The battlefield is called dharmaksetra or the field ot righteous-
ness for the Lord who is the protector of dharma is actively
Present in it.

Ruvuksetre: in the field of the Kurus. Kuruksetra is the land
of the Kurus, a leading clan of the period.?

The words, ‘“‘dharmaksetre kuruksetre,” suggest the law of life
by death. God, the terrible, is a side of the vision that Arjuna
sees on the field of battle. Life is a battle, a warfare against the
spirit of evil. Creative process is one of perpetual tension between
two incompatibles, each standing against the other. By their
mutual conflict, the development is advanced and the cosmic
purpose furthered. In this world are elements of imperfection,
evil and irrationality, and through action, dharma, we have to
change the world and convert the elements, which are now
opaque to reason, transparent to thought. War is a retributory

1 pranindm sahsdd abhyudayanthsreyasahetur yah sa dharmah.

2 It is a vast field near Hastinapura in the neighbourhood of
modern Delhi. When Dhrtarastra, the blind king of the Kurus,
decided to give his throne to Yudhisthira, who is also known as
Dharmaraja, the embodiment of virtue, in preference to his own
eldest son, Duryodhana, the latter, by tricks and treachery, secured
the throne for himself and attempted to destroy Yudhisthira and
his four brothers. Krsna, the head of the Yadava clan, sought to
bring about a reconciliation between the cousins, When all attempts
failed, a fratricidal war between the Kauravas and the Pandavas
became inevitable. Krsna proposed that he and his vassals would
join the two sides and left the choice to the parties. The vassals
were selected by Duryodhana and Krsna himself joined the Pandavas
as the charioteer of Arjuna. M.B., Udyogaparva: VI, 147. ‘Some put
their trusts in chariots and some in horses but we will trust in the
Lord, our God,” as the Old Testament says. The Pandavas and the
Kauravas represent the conflict between the two great movements,
the upward and the downward, the divine and the demoniac, the
dharma which helps us to grow in our spiritual stature and the
adharma which drags us down deeper into entanglement with matter.
‘The two are not irreconcilable as they spring from the same source.
The Pandavas and the Kauravas are cousins and have a common
ancestry.I. The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna 81

judgment as well as an act of discipline. Kuruksetra is also called
tapahksetra, the field of penance, of discipline.t War is at once
punishment and cleansing for mankind. God is judge as well as
redeemer. He destroys and creates. He is Siva and Visnu.

mamakah: my people.? This sense of mineness is the result of
aharhkdra which is the source of evil. Mamakara or selfishness
on the part of the Kauravas which leads to the love of power
and domination is brought out.

Sarijaya.

Sarhjaya 1s the charioteer of the blind king, Dhrtarastra, who
reports to lum the events of the war.

The Two Armies
samjaya uvaca
2. drstva tu pandavanikam
vyudhant duryodhanas tada -
acaryam upasamgamya
raja vacanam abravit
Samjaya said:
(2) Then, Duryodhana the prince, having seen the army

of the Pandavas drawn up in battle order, approached his
teacher and spoke this word:

acarya: teacher, one who knows the meaning of the scriptures,
teaches it to others and practises the teaching himself:

Drona, the acdrya, taught the art cf war to the princes on
both sides.

3. pasyai ’tam panduputranam
Gcarya mahatim camiim
vyiidham drupadaputrena
tava Sisyena dhimata

(3) Behold, O Teacher, this mighty army of the sons of
Pindu organized by thy wise pupil, the son of Drupada.3
1 See Manu, II, 19 and 20.
2 mameti hayantiti mamakah, avrayapurusah.
Abhinavagupta,
3 Dhygtadyumma is the son of Drupada, the king of Paficdla,82 The Bhagavadgita

4. atra sura mahesvasa
bhimarjunasama yudhi
yuyudhano viratas ca
drupadas ca maharathah

(4) Here are heroes, great bowmen equal in battle to Bhima
and Arjuna—Yuyudhina, Virata and Drupada, a mighty
wartior.?

5. ahrstaketus cekitanah
kasirajas ca viryavan
purujit kuntibhojas ca
Saibyas ca narapumgavah
(5) Dhrstaketu, Cekitana and the valiant King of Kasi, also
Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Saibya the foremost of men.?

6. yudhamanyus ca vikranta

ultamaujas ca viryavan

saubhadro draupadeyas ca
sarva eva maharathah

(6) Yudhamanyu, the strong and Uttamauja, the brave;
and also the son of Subhadra and sons of Draupadi, all of
them great warriors.

Saubhadrah is Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna and Subhadra.

7. asmakam tu visista ye
tan nibodha dvijottama
nayaka mama sainyasya
samjnartham tan bravimi te

(7) Know also, O Best of the twiceborn, the leaders of my

1 Bhima is Yudhisthira’s Commander-in-Chief, though nominally
Dbrstadyumna holds that office.

‘Arjuna is the friend of Krsna and the great hero of the Pandavas,

Yuyudhana is Krgna’s charioteer, also called Satyaki. Virata is
the prince in whose state the Pandavas lived for some time in disguise.

2 Dhystaketu is the king of the Cedis.

Cekitana is a famous warrior in the army of the Pandavas.

Purujit and Kuntibhoja are two brothers. Sometimes Purujit
Kuntibhoja is taken as one.

Saibya is a king of the Sibi tribe.I, The Hesttation and Despondency of Arjuna 83

army, those who are most distinguished among us. I will
name them now for thy information.

dvijottama: O best of the twiceborn. A dvija is one who is
investéd with the sacred thread, literally, one who is twice-born.
Initiation into the life of spirit is the aim of education. We are
born into the world of nature; our second birth is into the world
of spirit; tad dvittyam janma, mata savitri, pita tu acaryah: The
individual born a child of nature grows up into his spiritual
manhood and becomes a child of light.

8. bhavan bhismas ca karnas ca
krpas ca samitisnjayah
asvatthama vikarnas ca
saumadattis tathai 'va ca

(8) Thyself and Bhisma and Karna and Krpa, ever vic-
torious in battle; Asvatthaman, Vikarna, and also the son
of Somadatta.*

9. anye ca bahavah Sura
madarthe tyaktajwitah
nanaSastrapraharanah
sarve yuddhavisaradah

(9) And many other heroes who have risked their lives for
my sake. They are armed with many kinds of weapons and
are all well skilled in war.

10. aparyaptam tad asmakam
balam bhismabhiraksitam
paryaptarn tu idam etesam
balam bhimabhiraksitam
(to) Unlimited is this army of ours which is guarded by
Bhisma, while that army of theirs which is guarded by
Bhima is limited.
aparyaptam: insufficient. Sridhara.
+ Bhisma is the old sage-warrior who brought up Dnrtarastra
and Pandu.
Karna is half-brother to Arjuna.
Krpa is the brother-in-law of Drona.
‘Asvatthaman is the son of Drona.
Vikarna is the third of the hundred sons of Dhrtarastra.
Somadatti is the son of Somadatta, the King of the Bahikas.84 The Bhagavadgita

II. ayanesu ca sarvesu
yathabhagam avasthitah
bhismam eva ’bhiraksantu
bhavantah sarva eva hi

(zz) Therefore do ye all support Bhisma, standing firm in
all the fronts, in your respective ranks.

The Sounding of the Conchshells

12. tasya samjanayan harsam
kuruvrddhah pitimahah
simhanadam vinadyo ’ccaih
Sankham dadhmau pratépavan
(12) In order to cheer him up, the aged kuru, his valiant
grandsire, roared aloud like a lion and blew his conch.

With him and others, loyalty to duty counted far more than
individual conviction. Social order generally depends on obedience
to authority. Did not Socrates tell Crito that he would not break
the Laws of Athens which brought him up, guarded and watched
over him?

Roared aloud like a lion: Bhisma declared emphatically his
confidence.

13. tatah Sankhas ca bheryas ca
panavanakagomukhah
sahasai ’va ’bhyahanyanta
sa Sabdas tumulo ’bhavat

(13) Then conches and kettledrums, tabors and drums and
horns suddenly were struck and the noise was tumultuous

14. tatah Svetaw hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitau
madhavah pandavas cai va
divyau Sankhau pradadhmatuh

(14) When stationed in their great chariot, yoked to white
horses, Krsna and Arjuna blew their celestial conchesI. The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna 85
Throughout the Hindu and the Buddhist literatures, the chariot
stands for the psychophysical vehicle. The steeds are the senses,
the reins their controls, but the charioteer, the guide is the spirit
or real self, Atman.’ Krsna, the charioteer, is the Spirit in us.

15. paficajanyam hysikeso
devadatian dhanamjayah
paundram dadhmau mahasankham

bhimakarma vrkodarah
(15) Krsna blew his Paficajanya and Arjuna his Devadatta
and Bhima of terrific deeds and enormous appetite blew his
mighty conch, Paundra.

These indicate readiness tor battle.

16. anantavijayam raja
kuntiputro yudhisthirah
nakulah sahadevas ca
sughosamanipuspakau
(16) Prince Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew his Ananta-
vijaya and Nakula and Sahadeva blew their Sughosa and
Manipuspaka

17. kaSyas ca paramesvasah
Sikhandi ca mahdrathah
adhystadyumno viratas ca
satyakis ca ’parajitah
(17) And the king of Kagi, the Chief of archers, Sikhandin,
the great warrior, Dhrstadyumna and Virata and the
invincible Satyaki.

18. drupado draupadeyas ca
sarvasah prthivipate
saubhadras ca mahabahuh
Sankhan dadhmuh prthak-prthak

«Cp. Katha Up., III, 3. See also Plato, Laws, 898 C; Milindapaftha,
6-8,
> Yudhisthira is the eldest of the five sons of Pandu.

Nakula is the fourth of the Pandu princes. Sahadeva is the
youngest of them.86 The Bhagavadguu

(18) Drupada and the sons of Draupadi, O Lord of earth,
and the strong-armed son of Subhadr4, on all sides blew
their respective conches.

19. sa ghoso dhartarastranam
hydayani vyadarayat
nabhas ca prthivim cai ’va
tumulo vyanunadayan

(19) The tumultuous uproar resounding through earth and
sky rent the hearts of Dhrtarastra’s sons.

Arjuna Surveys the Two Armies

20. atha vyavasthitan dystva
dhartarastran kapidhvajah
pravrtie sastrasampate
dhanur udyamya pandavah

(20) Then Arjuna, whose banner bore the crest of Hanuman,
looked at the sons of Dhrtarastra drawn up in battle order;
and as the flight of missiles (almost) started, he took up his
bow.

pravrtte Sastrasampate: as the flight of missiles started. The
crisis throws Arjuna into great anguish. The opposing hosts are
drawn up in battle array, the conches are blown, the thrill of
anticipated battle is on them all, when, suddenly in a moment
of self-analysis, Arjuna realizes that the struggle meas that the
whole scheme of life, the great ideals of race and family, of law
and order, of patriotism and reverence for the teacher, which he
had loyally carried out till then, will have to be abandoned.

23. hrsikesam tada vakyam
idam aha mahipate
senayor ubhayor madhye

vatham sthapaya me 'cyuta

(21) And, O Lord of earth, he spoke this word to Hrsikega
(Krsna): Draw up my chariot, O Acyuta (Krsna), between
the two armies.L The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna 87
Acyuta: immovable is another name for Krsna™

22. yavad etan nirikse "ham
yoddhukaman avasthitan
kair maya saha yoddhavyam
asmin ranasamudyame

(22) So that I may observe these men standing, eager for
battle, with whom I have to contend in this strife of war.

23. yotsyamanan avekse "har
ya ele 'tra samagatah
dhartarastrasya durbuddher
yuddhe priyactkirsavah

(23) I wish to look at those who are assembled here, ready
to fight and eager to achieve in battle what is dear to the
evil-minded son of Dhrtarastra.

All the preparations for war are ready. That very morning,
Yudhisthira looks at the impenetrable formation organized by
Bhisma. Trembling with fear, he tells Arjuna, “How can victory
be ours in the face of such an army?”? Arjuna encourages his
brother by quoting an ancient verse, “they, that are desirous of
victory, conquer not so much by might and prowess as by truth,
compassion, piety and virtue. Victory is certain to be where
Krsna is. . .. Victory is one of his attributes, so also is humility.”3
Krsna advises Arjuna to purify himself and pray to Durga for
success. Arjuna descends from his chariot and chants a hymn in
praise of the Goddess. Pleased with his devotion, She blesses

* Other names used for Krsna are Madhusidana (slayer of the
demon Madhu), Arisidana (slayer of-enemies), Govinda (herdsman
or giver of enlightenment), Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva), Yadava
(descendant of Yadu), Keéava (having fine hair), Madhava (the
husband of Laksmi), Hrsikesa (lord of the senses, hrsika, ida),
Janardana (the liberator of men).

Other names used for Arjuna are Bharata (descended of Bharata),
Dhanathjaya (winner of wealth), Gudakega (having the hair in a
ball), Partha (son of Prtha), Pazarhtapa (oppressor of the enemy).

2 dhanarhjaya katham sakyam asmabhir yoddhum ahave. M.B.,
Bhismaparva, 21, 31.

3 -yudhyadhvam anahamkdra yato dharmag tato jayah . . . yatah
hyenas tato jayah. ibid., 21, 11-12.8&8 The Bhagavadgita

Arjuna: “O Son of Pandu, you will vanquish your enemy in no
time. You have Narayana Himself to help you.” And yet, as a
man of action, Arjuna did not think out the implications of his
enterprise. The presence of his teacher, the consciousness of the
Divine, helps him to realize that the enemies he has to fight are
dear and sacred to him. He has to cut social ties for the protection
of justice and the suppression of lawless violence.

The establishment of the kingdom of God on earth is a co-
operative enterprise between God and man. Man is a co-sharer
in the work of creation.

24. evam ukto hystkeso
gudakesena bharata
senayor ubhayor madhye
sthapayitua rathottamam

(24) Thus addressed by Gudakesa (Arjuna), Hrsikesa
(Krsna) having drawn up that best of chariots, O Bharata
(Dhrtarastra), between the two armies.

25 bhismadronapramukhatah
sarvesam ca mahiksitam
uvaca partha pasyat tan
samavetan kuriin iti

(28) In front of Bhisma, Drona and all the chiefs he said:
“Behold, O Partha (Arjuna), these Kurus assembled (here).”

26. tatra 'pasyat sthitan parthah
pityn atha pitamahan
acaryan matulan bhratin
putrén pautran sakhims tatha
(26) There saw Arjuna standing fathers and grandfathers,
teachers, uncles, brothers, sons and grandsons as also
companions.

27. Svasuran suhrdas cai ‘va
senayor ubhayor api
tan samiksya sa haunteyah
sarvan bandhiin avasthitanI. The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna 89

(27) And also fathers-in-law and friends in both the armies.
When the son of Kunti (Arjuna) saw all these kinsmen thus
standing arrayed

28. krpayad paraya ’visto
visidann tdam abravit
drstve ’mam svajanam krsna
yuyutsam samupasthitom
(28) He was overcome with great compassion and uttered
+ this in sadness;

* svajanam: his own people, kinsmen. It is not so much slaughter
but slaughter of one’s own people that causes distress and anxiety
to Arjuna. See also I, 31, 37, and 45. We are generally inclined
to take a mechanical view of wars and get lost in statistics. But,
with a little umagination, we can realize how our enemies are
human beings, “fathers and grandfathers” with their own indi-
vidual lives, with their longings and aspirations. Later on, Arjuna
asks whether victory is worth much after we make the place a
desert waste. See I, 36.

The Distress of Arjuna

When I see my own people arrayed and eager for fight
O Krsna,

29. sidanti mama gatrant
mukham ca parisusyats
vepathus ca Sartre me
romaharsas ca jayate
(29) My limbs quail, my mouth goes dry, my body shakes
and my hair stands on end.

30. gandivarh sramsate hastat
tvak cai ’va paridahyate
na ca Saknomy avasthatum
bhramati ’va ca me manah
(30) (The bow) Gandiva slips from my hand and my skin
too is burning all over. I am not able to stand steady. My
mind is reeling.go The Bhagavadgita

Arjuna’s words make us think of the loneliness of man oppressed
by doubt, dread of waste and emptiness, from whose being the
tiches of heaven and earth and the comfort of human affection
are slipping away. This intolerable sadness is generally the
experience of all those who aspire for the vision of Reality.

31. nimittant ca pasyam
viparitani kesava
na ca Sreyo 'nupasyams
hatva svajanam ahave
(31) And I see evil omens, O Kesava (Krsna), nor do I
foresee any good by slaying my own people in the fight
Arjuna’s attention to omens indicates his mental weakness and
instability.
32. na hankse vijayarh kysna
na ca rajyam sukhani ca
kim no rajyena govinda
kim bhogair jivitena va
(32) I do not long for victory, O Krsna, nor kingdom nor
pleasures. Of what use is kingdom to us, O Krsna, or
enjoyment or even life?
In moments of great sorrow we are tempted to adopt the
method of renunciation.
This verse indicates Arjuna’s inclination for renunciation of
the world: sasmydsasadhanasitcanam. Madhusidana.

33. yesam arthe kanksitam no
rajyath bhogah sukhani ca
ta ime ’vasthita yuddhe
pranams tyaktva dhanani ca
(33) Those for whose sake we desire kingdom, enjoyments
and pleasures, they stand here in battle, renonncing their
lives and riches

34. acaryah pitarah putras
tathai ‘va ca pitamahah
matulah svasurah pautrah
Syalah sarbandhinas tathaI. The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna or

(34) Teachers, fathers, sons and also grandfathers; uncles
and fathers-in-law, grandsons and brothers-in-law and
(other) kinsmen.

35. ean na hantum icchami
ghnatio pi madhusudana
api trailokyarajyasya
hetoh kim nu mahikrte
(35) These I would not consent to kill, though they kill me,
O Madhusiidana (Krsna), even for the kingdom of the three
worlds; how much less for the sake of the earth?

The three worlds refer to the Vedic idea of earth, heaven and
atmosphere (antariksa).

36. nihatya dhartarastran nah
ka pritih syay janardana
papam eva ’Srayed asman
hatvai ’tén atatayinah
(36) What pleasure can be ours, O Krsna, after we have
slain the sons of Dhrtarastra? Only sin will accrue to us if
we kill these malignants.

How shall we benefit by this bloody sacrifice? What is that
goal we expect to reach over the dead bodies of all that we hold
dear?

Arjuna is being guided by social conventions and customary
morality and not by his individual perception of the truth. He
has to slay the symbols of this external morality and develop
inward strength. His former teachers who gave him guidance in
life have to be slain before he can develop the wisdom of the
soul. Arjuna is still talking in terms of enlightened selfishness.

Even though the enemies are the aggressors, we should not kill
them, na pape pratipapah syat. Do not commit a sin in retaliation
for another sin. “Conquer the anger of others by non-anger;
conquer evil doers by saintliness; conquer the miser by gifts;
conquer falsehood by truth,””*

* akrodhena jayet krodham, as@dhurh sadhund jayet
jayet kadaryam dénena, jayet satyena canyltam.
M.B., Udyogaparva, 38, 73, 74.

See Dhammapada, 223.93 The Bhagavadgita
37. tasman na ’rha vayam hantum
dhértarastran svabandhavan
svajanam hi hatha hatua
sukhinah syama madhava

(37) So it is not right that we slay our kinsmen, the sons of
Dhrtardstra. Indeed, how can we be happy, O Madhava
(Krsga), if we kill our own people?

38. yady apy ete na pasyants
lobhopahatacetasah
kulaksayakrtam dosam
mitradrohe ca patakam

(38) Even if these whose minds are overpowered by greed,
sce no wrong in the destruction of the family and no crime
in treachery to friends;

39. katham na sheyam asmabhih
papad asman nivartitum
kulaksayakrlam dosam
prapasyadbhir janardana

(39) Why should we not have the wisdom to turn away from
this sin, O Janardana (Krsna), we who see the wrong in the
destruction of the family?

They are stricken blind by greed and have no understanding
but we are able to see the wrong. Even if we assume that they
are guilty of selfish passion and greed, it is a wrong to slay them
and it is a greater wrong because they who are blinded by passion
are unconscious of the guilt they are committing, but our eyes
are open and we see that it is a sin to slay.

40. kulaksaye pranasyantt
kuladharmah sanatanah
dharme naste kulam krtsnam
adharino ’bhibhavaty uta

(40) In the ruin of a family, its ancient laws are destroyed:
and when the laws perish, the whole family yields to lawless-
nessI. The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna 93

Wars tend to tear us away from our natural home surroundings
and uproot us from social traditions which are the distillation
of the mature will and experience of the people.

41. adharmabhibhavat krsna
pradusyanti kulastriyah
strisu dustasu varsneya
jayate varnasamkarah

(41) And when lawlessness prevails, O Varsneya (Krsna),
the women of the family become corrupted and when women
are corrupted, confusion of castes arises

Varna is usually translated by caste, though the present system
of caste in no way corresponds to the Gita ideal.

42. samkaro narakéyat 'va
kulaghnanam kulasya ca
paianti pitaro hy esam
luptapindodakakriyah
(42) And to hell does this confusion bring the family itself
as well as those who have destroyed it. For the spirits of
their ancestors fall, deprived of their offerings of rice and
water

It refers to the belief that the deceased ancestors require these
offerings for their welfare.

43. dosatr etaih kulaghnanam
varnasamkarakarakath
utsadyante jatidharmah
kuladharmas ca $a$vatah
(43) By the misdeeds of those who destroy a family and
create confusion of varnas, the immemorial laws of the caste
and the family are destroyed.

When we shatter the ideals enshrined in immemorial traditions,
when we disturb the social equilibrium, we only bring chaos into
the world.94 The Bhagavadgiia

44. uisannakuladharmanam
manusyanam janardana
narake niyatam vaso
bhavati "ty anususruma

(44) And we have heard it said, O Janardana (Krsna), that
the men of the families whose laws are destroyed needs must
live in hell.

45. aho bata mahat papam
hartum vyavasita vayam
yad rajyasukhalobhena
hantum svajanam udyatah

(45) Alas, what a great sin have we resolved to commit in
striving to slay our own people through our greed for the
pleasures of the kingdom!

46. yad: mam apratikaram
aSastram Sastrapanayah
dhartarastra rane hanyus
tan me ksemataram bhavet

(46) Far better would it be for me if the sons of Dhrtarastra,
with weapons in hand, should slay me in the battle, while I
remain unresisting and unarmed.

Another reading is priyataram for ksemataram.

Arjuna’s words are uttered in agony and love. He has his
mind on the frontiers of two worlds. He is struggling to get some-
thing done as man has struggled from the beginning, and yet he
is incapable of decision because of his inability to understand
either himself or his fellows or the real nature of the universe
in which he is placed. He is stressing the physical pain and the
material discomfort which warfare involves. The main end of life
is not the pursuit of material happiness. We are bound to miss
it as we approach the end of life, with its incidents of old age,
infirmity, death. For the sake of an ideal, for justice and love,
we must stand up to tyranny and face pain and death. On the
very edge of the battle, Arjuna Joses heart and all worldly con-
siderations persuade him to abstain from the battle. He has yet
to realize that wives and children, teachers and kinsmen, are dearI. The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna 95

not for their own sake but for the sake of the Self. Arjuna has still
to listen to the voice of the teacher who declares that he should
lead a life in which his acts will not have their root in desire, that
“there is such a thing as niskama karma—desireless action.

47. evam ukiva ’rjunah sankhye
rathopastha upavisat
visrjya saSaram capam
Sokasamvignamanasah

(47) Having spoken thus on the (field of) battle, Arjuna
sank down on the seat of his chariot, casting away his bow
and arrow, his spirit overwhelmed by sorrow.

The distress of Arjuna is a dramatization of a perpetually
recurring predicament. Man, on the threshold of higher life, feels
disappointed with the glamour of the world and yet illusions cling
to him and he cherishes them. He forgets his divine ancestry
and becomes attached to his personality and is agitated by the
conflicting forces of the world. Before he wakes up to the world
of spirit and accepts the obligations imposed by it, he has to
fight the enemies of selfishness and stupidity, and overcome the
dark ignorance of his self-centred ego. Man cut off from spiritual
nature has to be restored to it. It is the evolution of the human
soul that is portrayed here. There are no limits of time and space
to it. The fight takes place every moment in the soul of man.

tty Srvmad bhagavadgitasupanisatsu brahmavidyayam
yogasastre Srikysnarjunasamwvade arjunavisadayogo nama
prathamo ’dhyayak

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadgita, the science of the
Absolute, the scripture of Yoga and the dialogue between
Srikrsna and Arjuna, this is the first chapter entitled The
Depression of Arjuna.t

brahmavidya: the science of the Absolute. What is reality? Is
this perpetual procession of events all or is there anything else
which is not superseded? What is it that is capable of this mani-
t This is the usual colophon which is not a part of the text. There

are slight variations in the titles of the chapters in the different
versions, but they are not worth recording.96 The Bhagavadgita

fold manifestation? What compels or impels this exuberant play
of infinite possibilities? Have they any aim, any meaning? To
help us to understand the nature of reality is the purpose of
brahmavidya. Logical investigation is an aid to the attainment
of spiritual wisdom. S., in his Aparoksdnubhiti, observes that,
without inquiry, wisdom cannot be attained by any other means,
even as things of the world cannot be seen without light.

Yyoga-Sastra: the scripture of yoga. There are many who regard
philosophy as irrelevant to life. It is said that philosophy deals
with the changeless universe of reality and life with the transitory
world of process, This view received plausibi ity from the fact
that, in the West, philosophic speculation inated in the city
states of ancient Greece, where there were two classes of a wealthy
and leisured aristocracy indulging in the luxury of philosophic
speculation and a large slave population devoid of the pursuit
of the fine and practical arts. Marx's criticism, that philosophers
interpret the world while the real task is to change it, does
not apply to the author of the Gita, who gives us not only a
philosophical interpretation, brahmavidya, but also a practical
programme, yogasastra. Our world is not a spectacle to contem-
plate; it is a field of battle. Only tor the Gila improvement in
the individual nature is the way to social betterment.

krsnarjunasanwada: the dialogue between Krsna and Arjuna,
The author of the Gita gives dramatic expression to the felt
presence ot God in man.

When Arjuna is tempted to abstain trom his proper duty, the
Logos in him, his own authentic inspiration, reveals the ordained
path, when he is able to set aside the subtle whisperings of his
lower self. The innermost core of his soul is also the divine centre
of the whole universe. Arjuna’s deepest self is Krsna.? Man and
God need a third party as intermediary no more than do two
lovers. No one is so close to God as oneself and to get at Him
we require only an ardent heart, a pure intention. Arjuna stands
naked and alone without intermediaries opposite his God. There

 

' motpadyate vind yhdnarh vcdrend’nyasddhanath
yatha padarthabhanarh hi prakasena vind kvacit.

Cp. Tauler: “The soul in this profundity has a likeness and
ineffable nearness to God. . . . In this deepest, most inner and most
secret depth of the soul, God essentially, really and substantially
exists.”I. The Hesitation and Despondency of Arjuna 97

is perpetual communion between God and man and the dialogue_
proceeds until complete harmony of purpose is reached.

This Divine Principle is not at a distance but close to us. God
1s not a detached spectator or a distant judge of the issue but a
friend, sakha who is with us at all times, vihdvasayyasanabhojanesu
(XI, 42). Rg. Veda speaks of two birds, beautiful of wing, friends
by nature who live together on one tree.t

visdda: depression. The Chapter ends in dejection and sorrow
and this is also called Yoga as this darkness of the soul is an
essential step in the progress to spiritual life. Most of us go through
life without facing the ultimate questions. It is in rare crises,
when our ambitions lie in ruins at our feet, when we realize in
remorse and agony the sad mess we have made of our lives, we
cry out “Why are we here?” “What does all this mean and
whither do we go from here?” “My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?”. Draupadi cries: “I have no husbands, no
sons, no kinsmen, no brothers, no father, not even you, O Krsna.”3
Arjuna passes through a great spiritual tension. When he
detaches himself from his social obligations and asks why he
should carry out the duty expected of him by society, he gets
behind his socialized self and has full awareness of himself as an
individual, alone and isolated. He faces the world as a stranger
thrown into a threatening chaos. The new freedom creates a deep
feeling of anxiety, aloneness, doubt and insecurity. If he is to
function successfully, these feelings must be overcome.
' Cp. also: “Thou all-knowing God, Thou art always present near
us; Thou dost see whatever sins there may be without and within.”
sarvajfiatvam svayan nityarh sannidhau vartase ca nah
antar bahis ca yat kiftcit papam tat pasyati svayam.
+ naiva me patayas santi, na putra, na ca bandhavah
na bhrataro, na ca pita, naiva van madhusiidana.CHAPTER II

Samkhya Theory and Yoga Practice

Krsna’s rebuke and exhortation to be brave
Samjaya uoaca
I. tam tatha kypaya ’vistam
asruptrnakuleksanam
visidantam idam vakyam
uvdca madhusiidanah
Sarnjaya said:
{t) To him (who was) thus overcome by pity, whose eyes
were filled with tears and troubled and (who was) much
depressed in mind, Madhusiidana (Krsna) spoke this word.
The pity of Arjuna has nothing in common with Divine com-
passion. It is a form of self-indulgence, a shrinking of the nerves
trom an act which requires him to hurt his own people. Arjuna
recoils from his task in a mood of sentimental self-pity and his
teacher rebukes him. That the Kauravas were his kinsmen he
had known before.

Sribhagavan uvaca
2. kutas tua kaSmalam idam
visame samupasthitlam
andryajustam asvargyam
akirtikaram arjuna
The Blessed Lord said:
(2) Whence has come to thee this stain (this dejection) of
spirit in this hour of crisis? It is unknown to men of noble
mind (not cherished by the Aryans); it does not lead to
heaven; (on earth) it causes disgrace, O Arjuna.
anaryajustam: un-Aryan. The Aryans, it is contended by some,
are those who accept a particular type of inward culture and social
practice, which insists on courage and courtesy, nobility and
straight dealing.Il Samhkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 99

In his attempt to release Arjuna from his doubts, Krsna refers
to the doctrine of the indestructibility of the self, appeals to his
sense of honour and martial traditions, reveals to him God's
purpose and points out how action is to be undertaken in the
world.

3. klaibyam ma sma gamah partha
nat ‘tat tuayy upapadyate
ksudram hydayadaurbalyam
tyaktvo ‘itistha paramtapa
(3) Yield not to this unmanliness, O Partha (Arjuna), for it
does not become thee. Cast off this petty faintheartedness
and arise, O Oppressor of the foes (Arjuna).

Arjuna’s Doubts are Unresolved

arjuna uvaca
4. katham bhismam aharh samkhye
dronam ca madhusiidana
asubhih pratiyotsyami
pijarhav arisiidana
Arjuna said:

(4) How shall I strike Bhisma and Drona who are worthy
of worship, O Madhusiidana (Krsna), with arrows in battle,
O Slayer of foes (Krsna.)?

5. guriin ahatva hi mahanubhavan
Sreyo bhoktumi bhaiksam api ’ha loke
hatud 'rthakdmams tu guriin thai ’va

bhuijiya bhogan rudhirapradigdhan
(5) It is better to live in this world even by begging than to
slay these honoured teachers.t Though they are mindful of
their gains, they are my teachers and by slaying them, only,
I would enjoy in this world delights which are smeared with
blood.

1 mahanubhavan Srutadhyayana-tapa-achradi nibandhanah prabhavo
yesim tin hi mahanubhdvin ity eham vd padam. himam jadyam
apahantiti hi maha Adityo’ gnir va tasyevanubhavah samarthy m yesaun
t@n, Madhusidana. The latter is a fanciful explanation.100 The Bhagavadgita

rudhirapradigdhan: smeared with blood. If we make real to
ourselves the victims of every bloodstained page of history, if
we hear the woes of women, the cries of children, the tales of
calamity, of oppression and of injustice in its myriad forms, no
one with any human feelings would delight in such bloodstained
conquests.

6. na cai ’tad vidmah kataran no gariyo
vad va jayema yadi va no jayeyuh
yan eva hatod na jijtvisdmas

te ’vasthitah pramukhe dhartarastrah
(6) Nor do we know which for us is better, whether we
conquer them or they conquer us. The sons of Dhrtarastra,
whom if we slew we should not care to live, are standing
before us in battle array.

7. karpanyadosopahatasvathavah
prechami tuam dharmasanimighacetah
yac chreyah syan niscitam brithi tan me

Sisyas te’ham Sadhi mam toam prapannam
(7) My very being is stricken with the weakness of (senti-
mental) pity. With my mind bewildered about my duty, I
ask Thee. Tell me, for certain, which is better. I am Thy
pupil; teach me, who am seeking refuge in Thee.

niscitam: for certain; Arjuna is driven not only by despair,
anxiety and doubt but also by an ardent wish for certainty.

To realize one’s unreason is to step towards one’s development
to reason. The consciousness of imperfection indicates that the
soul is alive. So long as it is alive, it can improve even as a living
body can heal, if it is hurt or cut to a point. The human being
is led to a higher condition through a crisis of contrition.

It is the general experience of seekers that they are assailed
by doubtggand difficulties, even when they are on the threshold
of light. Phe light as it begins to shine in any soul provokes the
darkness to resist it. Arjuna faces difficulties, outward and inward,
such as the resistance of relations and friends, doubts and fears,
passions and desires. They must all be laid on the altar and
consumed in the fire of wisdom. The struggle with darkness will
continue until the light fills one’s whole being.II. Sithkhya Theory and Yoga Practice Tor

Weighed down by wretchedness, confused about what is right
and wrong, Arjuna seeks light and guidance from his teacher,
the Divine with him, within his self. Man cannot be left to
his own devices. When one’s world is in ruins, one can only
tum within and seek illumination as the gift of God’s infinite
compassion.

Arjuna does not ask for a metaphysic as he is not a seeker of
knowledge; as a man of action he asks for the law of action, for
his dharma, for what he has to do in this difficulty. “Master, what
wouldst thou have me to do?”

Like Arjuna, the aspirant must realize his weakness and
ignorance and yet be anxious to do God’s will and discover what
it is.

8. na hi prapasyami mama ‘panudyad
yac chokam ucchosanam indriyanam
avapya bhiimay asapatnam rddham
rajyam suranam api ca ‘dhipatyam
(8) I do not see what will drive away this sorrow which
dries up my senses even if I should attain rich and unrivalled
kingdom on earth or even the sovereignty of the gods.

The conflict in Arjuna must be healed. He must attain to a
new, integral, comprehensive consciousness.

samjaya uvaca
Q. evam uktva hrsikesam
gudakesah parantapah
na yotsya itt govindam
uktua tiisnim babhiiva ha
Sarjaya said:
(9) Having thus addressed Hrisikesa (Krsna), the mighty
GudakeSa (Arjuna) said to Govinda (Krsna) “I will not
fight” and became silent.
na yotsye: “I will not fight.” Arjuna, without waiting for the
advice of the teacher, seems to have made up his mind. While
he asks the teacher to advise him, his mind is not open. The task
of the teacher becomes more difficult.102 The Bhagavadgita

govinda, The omniscience of the teacher is indicated by this
word. Madhusiidana.*

tisnim babhiiva; became silent. The voice of truth can be
heard only in silence.

10. tam uvaca hrsikesah
prahasann iva bharata
senayor ubhayor madhye
visidantam idam vacah
(to) To him thus depressed in the midst of the two armies,
O Bharata (Dhrtarastra), HrisikeSa (Krsna), smiling as it
were, spoke this word.

In that moment of depression, the sinking heart of Arjuna
heard the Divine voice of Krsna. The smile indicates that he saw
through Arjuna’s attempt at rationalization or what is now
known as wishful thinking. The attitude of the saviour God who
knows all the sins and sorrows of suffering humanity is one of
tender pity and wistful understanding.

The Distinction between Self and Body: We should not grieve
Sor what is Imperishable
Sribhagavan uvaca
II. agocyan anvasocas tvam
prajnavadams ca bhasase
gatasiin agatasiims ca
na nusocanti panditah
The Blessed Lord said:
(tz) Thou grievest for those whom thou shouldst not grieve
for, and yet thou speakest words about wisdom Wise men do
not grieve for the dead or for the living.

The Kashmir version has ‘‘thou dost not speak as an intelligent
man”: “‘prajiiavan na abhibhasase.”?

' gaya vedalaksdndrt vdnisn vindatiti vyutpattya sarvavedopa-
danatvena sarvajtiam.

2 Cp, Plotinus: “Murders, death in all its shapes, the capture and
sacking of towns, all must be considered as so much stage-show,
so many shiftings of scenes, the horror and outcry of a play; for
here too, in all the changing doom of life, it is not the true man, the
inner soul that grieves and laments but merely the phantasm of
the man, the outer man, playing his part on the boards of the world.”
Enneads, Ul, 2, 15.—E. T.II. Sashkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 103

The teacher explains in brief in verses 11-38 the wisdom of
the Sarhkhya philosophy. The Sarhkhya does not refer to Kapila’s
system but to the teaching of the Upanisads.

12. natu evd’ham jatu na ’sam
na tvarn ne 'me janadhipah
na cat va na bhavisyamah
sarye vayam atah param
(tz) Never was there a time when I was not, nor thou, nor
these lords of men, nor will there ever be a time hereafter
when we all shall cease to be.

§. looks upon this reference to plurality as conventional. He
argues that the plural number is used with reference to the bodies
that are different and not with regard to the one Universal Self.!

R. lays stress on the distinction between Krsna, Arjuna, and
the princes as ultimate and holds that each individual soul is
imperishable and coeval with the whole universe.

The reference here is not to the eternity of the Absolute Spirit
but to the pre-existence and post-existence of the empirical egos.
The plurality of egos is a fact of the empirical universe. Each
individual is an ascent from initial non-existence to full existence
as a real, from asat to sat. While the Sarhkhya system postulates
a plurality of souls, the Gitd reconciles this with the unity, the
one Ksetrajiia in whom we live, move and have our being.
Brahman is the basis of all things and is not itself a thing.
Brahman does not exist in time but time is in it. In this sense
also, the egos have neither beginning nor end. Souls are like
Brahman, for the cause and the effect are essentially one as the
sayings, “I am Brahman,” “That art Thou” indicate. Cp. Suso:
“All creatures have existed eternally in the Divine essence as
in their exemplar. So far as they conform to the Divine idea,
all beings were before their creation, one with the essence of

The personal Lord, the Divine Creator, is coeval with the
empirical universe. In a sense He is the totality of empirical
existences. “The Lord of the beings travels in the wombs. Though
unborn he is born in many ways.”

' dehabhedanuvytiya bahuvacanam, nd’ tmabhedabhiprayena.

3 prajapatis carati garbhe antar ajayamano bahudh@ vijayate.
Vajasaneyi-samhitd XXXI, 19; see also XXXII, 4.104 The Bhagavadgita

S. says “Of a truth God is the only transmigrant.”* Compare
with this Pascal’s statement that Christ will be in agony till the
end of the world. He takes upon himself the wounds inflicted
on humanity. He suffers the conditions of created existence.
Liberated souls suffer.in time and enter peace at the end of time,
though they participate in Divine life even now. Only if the Per-
sonal Supreme is freely limited, we are helplessly limited. If He
is master of the play of prakrti, we are subject to its play.
Ignorance affects the individual spirit but not the Universal
Spirit. Till the cosmic process ends, the multiplicity of individuals
with their distinctive qualitative contents persists. The multi-
plicity is not separable from the cosmos. While the liberated
souls know the truth and live in it, the unliberated ones pass from
birth to birth, tied by the bondage of works.

13. dehino 'smin yatha dehe
kaumiévan yauvanam jara
tatha dehantavapriptir
dhivas tatra na muhyatt

(t3) As the soul passes in this body through childhood,
youth and age, even so is its taking on of another body.
The sage is not perplexed by this.

Cp. Visnu Smrti: XX, 49.

The human being makes himself fit for immortality by passing
through a series of births and deaths. The changes in the body
do not mean changes in the soul. None of its embodiments is
permanent.

14. matrasparsas tu kaunteya
Sttosnasukhaduhkhadah
adgamapayino 'miyas
tams titiksasva bhavata
(14) Contacts with their objects, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna),
give rise to cold and heat, pleasure and pain. They come
and go and do not last for ever, these learn to endure,
O Bharata (Arjuna).

¥ satyars nesvarld anyat samsarin, (S.B., I, 1, 5.)II. Samkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 105

These opposites depend on limited and occasional causes
whereas the joy of Brahman is universal, self-existent and inde-
pendent of particular causes and objects. This indivisible being
supports the variations of pleasure and pain of the egoistic exis-
tence which gets into contact with the multiple universe. These
attitudes of pleasure and pain are determined by the force of
habit. There is no obligation to be pleased with success and pained
with failure. We can meet them with a perfect equanimity. It is
the ego-consciousness which enjoys and suffers and it will con-
tinue to do so, so long as it is bound up with the use of life and
body and is dependent on them for its knowledge and action.
But when the mind becomes free and disinterested and sinks
into that secret serenity, when its consciousness becomes illumined,
it gladly accepts whatever happens, knowing full well that these
contacts come and go and are not itself, though they happen
to it

15. yam hi na vyathayanty ete
purusam purusarsabha
samaduhkhasukham dhiram
so "mrt. aya kalpate

(I5) The man who is not troubled by these, O Chief of men
(Arjuna), who remains the same in pain and pleasure, who
is wise makes himself fit for eternal life.

Eternal life is different from survival of death which is given
to every embodied being. It is the traziscendence of life and death.
To be subject to grief and sorrow, to be disturbed by the material
happenings, to be deflected by them from the path of duty that
has to be traversed, niyatam karma, shows that we are still
victims of avidya or ignorance.

16. na 'sato vidyate bhavo
na ’bhavo vidyate satah
ubhayor api drsto ’ntas tv
anayos tattvadarsibhih

¥ Cp. Imitation, “The desires of the senses draw us hither and
thither, but, when the hour is past, what do they bring us but
remorse of conscience and dissipation of spirit?”106 The Bhagavadgité

(16) Of the non-existent there is no coming to be; of the
existent there is no ceasing to be The conclusion about these
two has been perceived by the seers of truth.

sadakhyam brahma. §. defines real (sat) as that in regard to
which our consciousness never fails and unreal (asat) as that in
regard to which our consciousness fails. Our consciousness of
objects varies but not that of existence. The unreal which is the
passing show of the world veils the unchanging reality which is
for ever manifest.

According to R., the unreal is the body and the real is the soul.

Madhva interprets the first quarter of the verse as asserting
duality,. vidyate-abhavah. There is no destruction of the un
manifest (avyakta) prakrti. Sat, of course is indestructible.

17. avinasi tu tad viddhe
yena sarvam idam tatam
vindsam avyayasya ’sya
na kascit kartum arhati

(17) Know thou that that by which all this is pervaded is
indestructible. Of this immutable being, no one can bring
about the destruction.

tatam: pervaded. See also VIII, 22, 46; IX, 4; XI, 38 and
MB., XIT, 240, 20. §. uses “‘vyapiam.”

Not even Iévara, the Supreme Lord, can bring’ about the
destruction of the Self.? Its reality is self-established, svatassiddha
It is not unknown to anybody.3 The scriptures serve to remove
the adhyaropana or superposition of attributes alien to the Self
and not to reveal what is altogether unknown.

R. means by dtmatattua the qualitative unity and equality
in the midst of numerical plurality

18 antavanta ime deha
nityasyo ’ktah Saririnah
anasino ’prameyasya

tasmad yudhyasva bharata

1 yad-visaya buddhir na vyabhicarat tat sat, yad-visaya vyabhwcarati
tad asat.

3 na kascid dtmanam vindsayitum saknoti’svaropr. §.
3 na hy dima nama kasyacid aprasiddho bhavati. S.B.G., Il, 18.II. Sithkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 107

(x8) It is said that these bodies of the eternal embodied
(soul) which is indestructible and incomprehensible come to
an end. Therefore fight, O Bharata (Arjuna),

Sarin: here refers to the true self of the individual as in the
phrase sariraka mimamisd,! which is an enquiry into the nature
of the individual self. It is incomprehensible because it is not
known by the ordinary means of knowledge.

Ig ya enam vetti hantaram
yas cai nar manyate hatam
ubhau tau na vijanito
na ’yam hanti na hanyate

(x9) He who thinks that this slays and he who thinks that
this is slain; both of them fail to perceive the truth; this one
neither slays nor is slain

The author is discriminating between the self and the not-self,
purusa and prakrti of the Sarnkhya.?

20. na jayate mriyate va kadacin
na& yam bhiitua bhavita va na bhiiyah
ajo nityah Sasvato ’yam purano
na hanyate hanyamane Sarire

(20) He is never born, nor does he die at any time, nor
having (once) come to be will he again cease to be. He is
unborn, eternal, permanent and primeval. He is not slain
when the body is slain.

See Katha Up., Il, 18. Cp. na vadhenasya hanyate. Chandogya
Up., VIII, 1, 5. The soul is here spoken of as “having come to
be.” It is everlasting as a Divine form and derives its existence
from God.

§. splits up the phrase into bhatva-abhavita.

‘Cp. Brhadaranyaka Up. yal $aksad aparoksdd brahma ya atma
sarvantarah III, 4, 1.
2 Cp. Emerson’s Brahma.
“If the red slayer thinks he slays,
Or if the slain think he is slain,
They know not well the subtle ways
I keep and pass and turn again.”108 The Bhagavadgita

ai veda 'vindsinar nityam
ya enam ajam avyayam
katham sa purusah partha
kam ghatayati hanti kam

(21) He who knows that it is indestructible and eternal,
uncreate and unchanging, how can such a person slay any
one, O Partha (Arjuna), or cause any one to slay?

When we know the self to be invulnerable, how can anyone
slay it?

22. vasamsi jirndni yathd vihdya
ant grhnati naro ’parani

vihaya jirnany

anyani samyati navani dehi

(22) Just as a person casts off worn-out garments and puts
on others that are new, even so does the embodied soul cast
off worn-out bodies and take on others that are new.

The eternal does not move from place to place but the embodied
soul moves from one abode to another. It takes birth each time
and gathers to itself a mind, life and body formed out of the
materials of nature according to its past evolution and its need
for the future. The psychic being is the vijiiana which supports
the triple manifestation of body (anna), life (prana) and mind
(manas). When the gross physical body falls away, the vital and
mental sheaths still remain as the vehicle of the soul. Rebirth
is a law of nature. There is an objective connection between the
various forms of life. Cp. Katha Up., I, 6. “Like corn a mortal
ripens and like corn is he born again.”

Embodiments seem to be essential for the soul. Is it then right
to kill the body? The world of concrete existence has a meaning.

  

  

23. nai nam chindanti Sastrani
nai ’nam dahati pavakah
na cai nam kledayanty apo

na Sosayati marutah

(23) Weapons do not cleave this self, fire does not burn him;
waters donot make him wet; nor does the wind make him dry.
See also Moksadharma, 174. 17.II Séshkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 109

24. acchedyo yam adahyo ’yam
akledyo ’Sosya eva ca
nityah sarvagatah sthanur
acalo yam sanatanah

(24) He is uncleavable, He cannot be burnt. He can be
neither wetted nor dried. He is eternal, all-pervading,
unchanging and immovable. He is the same for ever.

25. avyakto ’yam acintyo ‘yam
avikaryo ’yam ucyate
tasmad evam viditvai ’nam
na ’nusocitum arhasi

(25) He is said to be unmanifest, unthinkable and unchang-
ing. Therefore, knowing him as such, thou shouldst not grieve.

Right through it is the purusa of the Sarhkhya that is described
here, not the Brahman of the Upanisads. The purusa is beyond
the range of form or thought and the changes that affect mind,
life and body do not touch him. Even when it is applied to the
Supreme Self, which is one in all, it is the unthinkable (acintya)
and immutable (avikarya) Self that is meant. Arjuna’s grief is
misplaced as the self cannot be hurt or slain. Forms may change;
things may come and go but that which remains behind them all
is for ever."

We should not Grieve over what is Perishable

26. atha cai "nam nityajatam
nityam vd manyase mytam
tatha pi tvam mahabaho
nai ’narh Socitum arhasi

(26) Even if thou thinkest that the self is perpetually born
and perpetually dies, even then, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna),
thou shouldst not grieve.

* When Crito asks, “In what way shall we bury you, Socrates?”
Socrates answers, “In any way you like, but first, you must catch me,
the real me. Be of good cheer, my dear Crito, and say that you are
burying my body only, and do with that whatever is usual and what
you think best.””1I0 The Bhagavadgita

27. jatasya hi dhruvo mytyur
dhruvam janma mrtasya ca
tasmad apariharye 'rthe
na tvam socitum arhasi

(27) For to the one that is born death is certain and certain
is birth for the one that has died. Therefore for what is
unavoidable, thou shouldst not grieve.

Cp. “In this rotating world of becoming, what dead person
does not come to life again.”: The realization of this fact will
induce in us poise and proportion.?

Our existence is brief and death is certain. Our human dignity
requires us to accept pain and suffering for the sake of the right.

The inevitability of death, however, cannot justify murders,
suicides or wars. We cannot desire deliberately the death of
others, simply because all men are bound to die. It is so that all
life ends in death, that all progress is perishable, that nothing
is permanent in the temporal sense of the term. But in every
perfect realization of life, the eternal becomes actualized and the
development in time is only the means to this essential aim.
What is subject entirely to the rule of change or time is not of
intrinsic importance; the eternal plan is the central truth whether
cosmic accidents permit its full realization on earth or not.

t parivartini samsire mrtah ho vB na jAyate. Hitopadesa.

2 Gautama the Buddha consoled the mother who lost her only
son while yet a child by asking her to go into the town and bring
him “a little mustard seed from any house where no man hath yet
died.” She went and found that there was no family where death
had not entered. She discovered that it is the law of all things that
they will pass away.

The Buddhist nun Patdcdra is represented as consoling many
bereaved mothers in the following words:

Weep not, for such is here the life of man
Unasked he came, unbidden went he hence
Lo! ask thyself again whence came thy son
To bide on earth this little breathing space
By one way come and by another gone. .. .
So hither and so hence—why should ye weep?

Psalms of the Sisters.
ET. by Mrs, Rhys Davids (1909), p. 78.11 Samkhya Theory and Yoga Practice qIr

28. avyaktadini bhiitam
vyaktamadhyani bharata
avyaktanidhanany eva
tatra ka paridevana
(28) Beings are unmanifest in their beginnings, maziifest
in the middles and unmanifest again in their ends, O
Bharata (Arjuna), What is there in this for lamentation?

29. a@Scaryavat pasyati kascid enam
@scaryavad vadati tathai ’va ca ’nyah
a@Scaryavac cai’nam anyah Srnoti
Srutud "py enam veda na cai ’va kaSscit
29) One looks upon Him as a marvel, another likewise
speaks of Him as a marvel; another hears of Him as a
marvel; and even after hearing, no one whatsoever has
known Him
Though the truth of the Self is free of access to all mankind, it
is attained only by very few who are willing to pay the price in
self-discipline, steadfastness and non-attachment. Though the
truth is open to all, many do not feel any urge fo seek. Of those
who have the urge, many suffer from doubt and vacillation.
Even if they do not have doubts, many are scared away by
difficulties. Only a few rare souls succeed in braving the perils
and reaching the goal.
Cp. Katha Up., II, 7. “Even when one has beheld, heard
and proclaimed it, no one has understood it.” S.

30. dehi mityam avadhyo ’yar
dehe sarvasya bharata
tasmat sarvani bhitant
na tvam Socitum arhasi
(30) The dweller in the body of every one, O Bharata
(Arjuna), is eternal and can never be slain, Therefore thou
shouldst not grieve for any creature.

Man is a compound of Self which is immortal and body which
is mortal. Even if we accept this position that body is naturally
mortal, still as it is the means of furthering the interests of the
Self it has to be preserved. This is not by itself a satisfactory
reason. So Krsna refers to Arjuna’s duty as a warrior.r12 The Bhagavadgita

Appeal to a Sense of Duty

31. svadharmam api ca ’veksya
na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyad dhi yuddhac chreyo ’nyat
ksatriyasya na vidyate

(31) Further, having regard for thine own duty, thou
shouldst not falter, there exists no greater good for a Ksatriya
than a battle enjoined by duty.

His svadharma or law of action, requires him to engage in
battle. Protection of right by the acceptance of battle, if necessary,
is the social duty of the Ksatriya, and not renunciation. His duty
is to maintain order by force and not to become an ascetic by
“shaving off the hair.”* Krsna tells Arjuna that for warriors there
is no more ennobling duty than a fair fight. It isa privilege that
leads to heaven.

32. yadrcchaya co ’papannam

svargadvaram apavrtam

sukhinah ksatriyah partha
labhante yuddham idysam

(32) Happy are the Ksatriyas, O Partha (Arjuna), for whom
such a war comes of its own accord as an open door to heaven.

A Ksatriya’s happiness consists not in domestic pleasures and
comfort but in fighting for the right.*

33. atha cet tuam imam dharmyam
samgramanh na karisyasi
tatah svadharmamn kirtimn ca
hitoad papam avapsyasi
Cp. M.B., danda eva hn rajendra kéatradharmo na mundanam,
Santiparva, 23, 46. “He who saves from destruction is a Ksatriya.”
ksatdd yo vai trayatt ’ti sa tasmat ksatirryah smytah. M.B., XII, 29, 138.
2 Cp. “O thou best of men, there are only two types who can
pierce the constellation of the Sun (and reach the sphere of Brahman) ;
the one is the sarhnyasin who is steeped in Yoga and the other 1s
the warrior who falls in the battlefield while fighting.”
dvdv imau purusacyaghra stiryamandala bhedinau
parivrat yogayuktas ca rane ca'b imukho hatah
M.B., Udyogapurva, 32, 65.II Samkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 113

(33) But if thou doest not this lawful battle, then thou wilt
fail thy duty and glory and will incur sin.

When the struggle between right and wrong is on, he who
abstains from it out of false sentimentality, weakness or cowardice
would be committing a sin.

34. akirtim cad "pi bhiitani
Rathayisyanti te 'vyayam
sambhauitasya ca ’kirtir
maranad atiricyate
(34) Besides, men will ever recount thy ill-fame and for
one who has been honoured, ill-fame is worse than death.

35. bhayad ranad uparatam
mamsyante tude maharathah
yesam ca tvam bahumato
bhited yasyasi laghavam
(35) The great warriors will think that thou hast abstained
from battle through fear and they by whom thou wast
highly esteemed will make light of thee.

36. avacyavadams ca bahiin
vadisyanti tava *hitah
nindantas tava samarthyant
tato duhkhataram nu kim
(36) Many unseemly words will be uttered by thy enemies,
slandering thy strength. Could anything be sadder than
that?
Contrast this with the central teaching of the Gita that one
should be indifferent to praise and blame.

 

37. hato va prapsyasi svargam
jitoad va bhokgyase mahim
tasmad uttistha kaunteya
yuddhaya krtaniscayah
(37) Either slain thou shalt go to heaven; or victcrious thou
shalt enjoy the earth; therefore arise, O Son of Kunti
(Arjuna), resolved on battle.114 The Bhagavadgita

Whether we look at the metaphysical truth or the social duty

our path is clear. It is possible to rise higher through the per-

“formance of one’s duty in the right spirit, and in the next verse
Krsna proceeds to indicate the spirit.

38. sukhaduhkhe same krtva
labhalabhau jayajayau
tato yuddhaya yujyasva
nai vam papam avapsyasi
(38) Treating alike pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory
and defeat, then get ready for battle. Thus thou shall not
incur sin.

Yet in the previous verses, Krsna lays stress on sensibility to
shame, the gain of heaven and earthly sovereignty. After urging
worldly considerations, he declares that the fight has to be under-
taken in a spirit of equal-mindedness. Without yielding to the
restless desire for change, without being at the mercy of emotional
tps and downs, let us do the work assigned to us in the situation
in which we are placed. When we acquire faith in the Eternal
and experience Its reality, the sorrows of the world do not disturb
us.t He who discovers his true end of life and yields to it utterly
is great of soul. Though everything else is taken away from him,
though he has to walk the streets, cold, hungry and alone,
though he may know no human being into whose eyes he can
look and find understanding, he shall yet be able to go his way
with a smile on his lips for he has gained inward freedom.

The Insight of Yoga
39. esa te ’bhihita simkhye
buddhir yoge tv imam Srnu
buddhya yukto yaya partha
harmabandham prahasyasi

 

(39) This is the wisdom of the Sarnkhya given to thee,
O Partha (Arjuna). Listen now to the wisdom of the Yoga.
If your intelligence accepts it, thou shalt cast away the
bondage of works.

' Cp. Luther: “And though they take our life, goods, honour,
children, wife, yet is their profit small; these things shall vanish all,
the city of God remaineth.”II. Sithkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 1I5

damikhya in the Gita does not mean the system of philosophy
known by that name; nor does Yoga mean P&atafijalayoga. The
scholastic version of the Sarhkhya is a frank dualism of purusa
(self) and prakrti (not-self) which is transcended in the Gita,
which affirms the reality of a Supreme Self who is the Lord of all.
Sarhkhya gives an intellectual account of the intuition of the
unchanging One.! It is the yoga of knowledge. The yoga of
action is karma yoga, See III, 3. The knowledge hitherto described
is not to be talked about and discussed academically. It must
become an inward experience. In the Gita, Sarhkhya lays stress
on knowledge and renunciation of desire and Yoga on action.
How is one who knows that the self and body are distinct, that
the self is indestructible and unmoved by the events of the world,
to act? The teacher develops buddhiyoga or coricentration of
buddhi or understanding. Buddhi is not merely the capacity to
frame concepts. It has also the function of recognition and dis-
crimination. The understanding or buddhi must be trained to
attain insight, constancy, equal-mindedness (samata). The mind
(manas), instead of being united to the senses, should be guided
by buddhi which is higher than mind. III, 42. It must become
united to buddhi (buddhiyukta).

The influence of the scholastic Sarhkhya which was in the
making at the time of the Gita is here evident. According to it,
the purusa is inactive, and bondage and liberation do not belong
to it in reality. They are essentially the work of buddhi, one of the
twenty-four cosmic principles. Out of prakrti evolve successively
five elemental conditions of matter, ether, air, fire, water and
earth, five subtle properties of matter, sound, touch, form, taste
and smell, buddhi or mahat which is the discriminating principle
of intelligence and will, aharhkara or self-sense, and mind with
its ten sense functions, five of knowledge and five of action.
Liberation is achieved when buddhi discriminates between purusa
and prakrti. This view is adapted to the Gita theism. Buddhi is
the driver of the chariot of the body drawn by the horses of the
senses which are controlled by the reins of mind (manas). The
self is superior to buddhi but is a passive witness. In the Katha
Up., buddhi is the charioteer which controls the senses through

* Madhva quotes Vyasa to this effect.

Suddhatmatattuavijiianarn sarakhyam ity abhidhiyate, Cp. Svetasva-
tara Up. sammkhyayogadhigamyam. VI, 13.116 The Bhagavadgita

the mind and enables it to know the self.: If the buddhi is lit up
by the consciousness of the self and makes it the master-light
of its life, its guidance will be in harmony with the cosmic purpose.
If the light of the atman is reflected in buddhi in a proper way,
that is, if the buddhi is cleared of all obscuring tendencies, the
light will not be distorted, and buddhi will be in union with the
Spirit. The sense of egoism and separateness will be displaced
by a vision of the harmony in which each is all and all is each.

Samkhya and Yoga are not in the Gia discordant systems.
They have the same aim but differ in their methods,

40. ne ’ha ’bhikramandaso ’sti
pratyavayo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya
trayate mahato bhayat

(40) In this path, no effort is ever lost and no obstacle
prevails; even a little of this righteousness (dharma) saves
from great fear.

No step is lost, every moment is a gain. Every effort in the
struggle will be counted as a merit.

41. vyavasdyatmika buddhir
eke "ha kurunandana
bahusakha hy anantas ca
buddhayo ’vyavasayinain

(41) In this, O joy of the Kurus (Arjuna), the resolute
(decided) understanding is single; but the thoughts of the
irresolute (undecided) are many-branched and endless.

The discursiveness of the irresolute buddhi is contrasted with
the concentration, the single-mindedness of the resolute. Human
life finds its fulfilment through self-devotion to a commanding
end and not in the unfettered pursuit of endless possibilities. One-
pointedness has to be acquired by cultivation. Distraction is our
natural condition from which we have to be freed but not by
the mysticisms of nature or sex, race or nation but by a genuine
experience of Reality. Single-mindedness backed by such an
experience is a supreme virtue and cannot be twisted to fanaticism.

+ IH, 3.II. Sésakhya Theory and Yoga Practice 117
No Wisdom for the Worldly-Minded

42. yam imam puspitam vacam
pravadanty avipascitah
vedavadaratah partha
na ’nyad asti "ti vadinah

43. Ramatmanah svargapara
janmakarmaphalapradim
kriyavisesabahulam
bhogaisvaryagatim prati

(42-43) The undiscerning who rejoice in the letter of the
Veda, who contend that there is nothing else, whose nature
is desire and who are intent on heaven, proclaim these
flowery words that result in rebirth as the fruit of actions
and (lay down) various specialized rites for the attainment
of enjoyment and power.

The teacher distinguishes true karma from ritualistic piety,
Vedic sacrifices are directed to the acquisition of material rewards
but the Gita asks us to renounce all selfish desire and work, making
all life a sacrifice, offered with true devotion.

Cp. Mundaka Up., I, 2, 10. “‘These fools, who believe that only
the performance of sacrificial ritual (istapirtam) is meritorious
and nothing else is meritorious, come back to this mortal world,
after having enjoyed happiness in heaven.” See also Iga Up., 9, 12;
Katha, Il, 5. The Vedic Aryans were like glorious children in
their eager acceptance of life. They represent the youth of
humanity whose life was still fresh and sweet, undisturbed by
disconcerting dreams. They had also the balanced wisdom of
maturity. The author however limits his attention to the
karmakanda of the Veda which is not its whole teaching. While
the Veda teaches us to work with a desire for recompense whether
in a temporary heaven or in a new embodied life, buddhiyoga
leads us to release.

44. bhogaisvaryaprasaktanam
taya 'pahytacetasam
vyavasayaimika buddhih
samadhau na vidhiyate118 The Bhagavadgita

(44) The intelligence which discriminates between right and
wrong, of those who are devoted to enjoyment and power
and whose minds are carried away by these words (of the
Veda) is not well-established in the Self (or concentration).

They will not have the one-pointedness of mind in God. The
intelligence which is intended to be well trained is seduced from
its normal functioning.

45. traigunyavisaya veda
nistraigunyo bhava ’rjuna
nirdvandvo nityasattvastho
niryogaksema dimavan

(45) The action of the three-fold modes is the subject matter
of the Veda; but do thou become free, O Arjuna, from this
threefold nature; be free from the dualities (the pairs of
opposites), be firmly fixed in purity, not caring for acquisi-
tion and preservation, and be possessed of the Self.

nityasativa. Arjuna is asked to stand above the modes and be
firmly rooted in the sattva. This is not the mode of sattva which
Arjuna is asked to go beyond, but is eternal truth. $. and R.,
however, take it to mean the sattvaguna. Ritualistic practices
necessary for the maintenance of worldly life are the results of
the modes. To gain the higher reward of perfection, we must
direct our attention to the Supreme Reality. The conduct of the
liberated, however, will be outwardly the same as that of one
who is in the sattva condition. His action will be calm and dis-
interested. He acts with no interest in the fruits of action; not
so the followers of the karmakanda of the Veda.

Yogaksema is acquisition of the new and preservation of the
old.2

dtmavan: be possessed of the self, ever vigilant.s Apastamba
declares that there is nothing higher than the possession of the
self.4 To know the Spirit which has neither commencement nor

‘Cp. Sridhara: samadhis cittackagryam, pavamesvardbhimuk-
hatvam wt yavat; tasmn niscayatmika buddhts tu na vidhiyate.

* anupatlasya upaddnarm yogah, upaitasya raksanara ksemah.

3 apramattas ca bhava. §

4 dmalabhan na parari vidyate. Dharma Sitra, I, 7, 2.II, Samkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 1rg

decay, the Spirit which is immortal, to know Him whom we do
not know is the true end of man. If we suppress this side we are
slayers of the self, to use the phrase of the Upanisad.

46. yavan artha udapane
sarvatah sarnplutodake

tavan sarvesu vedesu
brahmanasya vijanatah

(46) As is the use of a pond in a place flooded with water
everywhere, so is that of all the Vedas for the Brahmin
who understands.

Cp. “Just as one who gets water from the river does not attach
importance to a well, so the wise do not attach any importance
to ritual action.”2 For those of illumined consciousness, ritual
observances are of little value.

Work Without Concern for the Results

47. karmany eva 'dhikaras te
ma phalesu kadacana
ma karmaphalahetur bhiir
ma te sango ’stv akarmant

(47) To action alone hast thou a right and never at all to
its fruits; let not the fruits of action be thy motive; neither
let there be in thee any attachment to inaction

This famous verse contains the essential principle of disin-
terestedness. When we do our work, plough or paint, sing or
think, we will be deflected from disinterestedness, if we think of
fame or income or any such extraneous consideration. Nothing
matters except the good will, the willing fulfilment of the purpose
of God. Success or failure does not depend on the individual but
on other factors as well. Giordano Bruno says: “I have fought,
that is much, victory is in the hands of fate.”

\ Gtmahano janah.
2 na te (jfdnmah) karma prasamsann kipam nadyam pibann iva
M.B. Santiparva. 240, 10.120 The Bhagavadgita

48. yogasthah kuru karmani
sangam tyakiva dhanamjaya
siddhyasiddhyoh samo bhitea
samatvam yoga ucyate

(48) Fixed in yoga, do thy work, O Winner of wealth
(Arjuna), abandoning attachment, with an even mind in
success and failure, for evenness of mind is called yoga.

yogasthah: steadfast in inner composure.

samatvam: inner poise. It is self-mastery. It is conquest of
anger, sensitiveness, pride and ambition.

We must work with a perfect serenity indifferent to the results.
He who acts by virtue of an inner law is on a higher level than
one whose action is dictated by his whims.

Those who do works for the sake of their fruits go to the region
of the fathers or pitrs, those who pursue wisdom go to the region
of the gods or devas.t

49. diirena hy avaram karma
buddhiyogad dhanaryjaya
buddhau saranam anviccha
krpanah phalahetavah

(49) Far inferior indeed is mere action to the discipline of
intelligence (buddhiyoga), O Winner of wealth (Arjuna),
seek refuge in intelligence. Pitiful are those who seek for
the fruits (of their action).

buddhiyoga. See also XVIII, 57.

50. buddhiyukto jahatt ha
ubhe sukytaduskrte
vasmad yogaya yujyasva
yogah karmasu kausalam
(50) One who has yoked his intelligence (with the Divine)
(or is established in his intelligence) casts away even here
1 Cp, §, dviprakdram ca vittam manusam daivam ca, tatra manusarn

vita karmaripam pitrlokapraptisadhanam, vidya ca daivam vittam
devalokapraptisadhanam. II, 11,Il. Séithkhya Theory and Yoga Practtve Iai

both good and evil. Therefore strive for yoga, yoga is skill in
action.

He rises to a status higher than the ethical with its distinction
of good and evil. He is rid of selfishness and therefore is incapable
of evil. According to S., Yoga is evenness of mind in success or
failure, possessed by one who is engaged in the performance of
his proper duties, while his mind rests in God.t

51. harmajam buddhiyukta hi
phalam tyakiva manisinah
janmabandhavinirmuktiah
padam gacchanty andmayam

(51) The wise who have united their intelligence (with the
Divine) renouncing the fruits which their action yields.and
freed from the bonds of birth reach the sorrowless state.

Even when alive, they are released from the bond of birth and
go to the highest state of Visnu called moksa or liberation, which
is free from all evil.2

52. yada te mohakaltlam
buddhir vyatitarisyat:
tadd gantasi nirvedam
Srotavyasya Srutasya ca

(52) When thy intelligence shall cross the turbidity of delu-
sion, then shalt thou become indifferent to what has been
heard and what is yet to be heard.

Scriptures are unnecessary for the man who has attained the
insight. See II, 46; VI, 44. He who attains the wisdom of the
Supreme passes beyond the range of the Vedas and the Upanisads,
Sabdabrahmativartate.

su armasu varlamdnasya y& siddhyasiddhyok
jar Gr pitacetastaya.
Cp. Sridhara, karmajari phalas: tyaktud kevalam isvardradhandrtham
eva karma hurvand manisino jadnino bhitva janmariipena bandhena
vinirmuktah.
2 jivanta eva janmabandhavinirmuhtah santah padar paramarh
visnor moksakhyam gacchanty andmayam sarvopadravarahitam. S,122 The Bhagavadgita
53. Srutivipratipanna te
yada sthasyats niscala
samadhav acala buddhis
tadd yogam avapsyast

(53) When thy intelligence, which is bewildered by the
Vedic texts, shall stand unshaken and stable in spirit
(samadhi), then shalt thou attain to insight (yoga).

Srutivipratipanna: bewildered by the Vedic texts. As different
schools of thought and practice profess to derive support from
the Vedas, they bewilder.

samadhi is not loss of consciousness but the highest kind of
consciousness.' The object with which the mind is in communion
is the Divine Self. Buddhiyoga is the method by which we get
beyond Vedic ritualism and do our duty without any attachment
for the results of our action. We must act but with equanimity
which is more important than any action. The question is not
what shall we do, but how shall we do? In what spirit shall we
act?

The Characteristics of the Perfect Sage

arjuna uvaca
54 sthitaprajfasya ka bhasa
samadhisthasya kesava
sthitadhth kim prabhaseta
him dsita vrajeta kim
Arjuna said:
(54) What is the description of the man who has this firmly
founded wisdom, whose being is steadfast in spirit, O Kegava
(Krsna)? How should the man of settled intelligence speak,
how should he sit, how should he walk?

{n the Hindu scheme of life, there is the last stage of sarhny4sa
where the ritual 1s abandoned and social obligations surrendered.
The first stage is that of student discipleship, the second that
of the householder, the third that of retreat and the fourth and

« It is what Plato means when he exhorts the soul to “collect
and concentrate itself in its self."" Phaedo, 83a.II. Sérnkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 123

the last is that of total renunciation. Those who abandon the
household life and adopt the homeless one are the renouncers,
This state may be entered upon at any time, though normally
it comes after the passage through the other three stages, The
sarhnyasins literally die to the world and even funeral rites are
performed when they leave their homes and become parivrajakas
or homeless wanderers. These developed souls, by their very
example, affect the society to which they no longer belong. They
form the conscience of society. Their utterance is free and their
vision untrammelled. Though they have their roots in the Hindu
religious organization, they grow above it and by their freedom
of mind and universality of outlook are a challenge to the cor-
rupting power and cynical compromise of the authoritarians,
Their supersocial life is a witness to the validity of ultimate
values from which other social values derive. They are the sages,
and Arjuna asks for some discernible signs, some distinguishing
marks of such developed souls.

Sribhagavan uvéca
55. prajahati yada kaman
sarvan partha manogatan
Gtmany eva ’tmana tustah
sthitaprajnas tado ’cyate
The Blessed Lord said:
(55) When a man puts away all the desires of his mind,
O Partha (Arjuna), and when his spirit is content in itself,
then is he called stable in intelligence.
Negatively, the state is one of freedom from selfish desires and
positively, it is one of concentration on the Supreme.

56. duhkhesv anudvignamanah
sukhesu vigatasprhah
vitaragabhayakrodhah
sthitadhir mumir ucyate

(56) He whose mind is untroubled in the midst of sorrows
and is free from eager desire amid pleasures, he from whom
passion, fear, and rage have passed away, he is called a sage
of settled intelligence.124 The Bhagavadgita

It is self-mastery, conquest of desire and passion that is
insisted on.

57. yah sarvatra ’nabhisnehas
tat-tat prapya Subhasubham
na ’bhinandati na dvesti
tasya prajha pratisthita

(57) He who is without affection on any side, who does not
rejoice or loathe as he obtains good or evil, his intelligence
is firmly set (in wisdom).

Flowers bloom and they fade. There is no need to praise the
former and condemn the latter. We must receive whatever comes
without excitement, pain or revolt.

58. yada samharate ca ’yam
kiirmo ’ngani ’va sarvasah
indriyani ’ndriyarthebhyas
tasya prajna pratisthita

(58) He who draws away the senses from the objects of
sense on every side as a tortoise draws in his limbs (into the
shell), his intelligence is firmly set (in wisdom).

59. visaya vinivartante
mraharasya dehinah
vasavarjam vaso py asya
param drstud nivartate

(59) The objects of sense turn away from the embodied
soul who abstains from feeding on them but the taste for
them remains. Even the taste turns away when the Supreme
is seen.

The author is explaining the difference between outer absten-
tion and inner renunciation. We may reject the objects but desire

2 Cp. Lucretius: ‘‘Religion does not consist in turning unceasingly
toward the veiled stone, nor in approaching all the altars, nor in
throwing oneself prostrate on the ground, nor in raising the hands
before the habitations of gods, nor in deluging the temples with the
blood of beasts, nor in heaping vows upon vows; but in beholding
all with a peaceful soul.” De rerum Natura.IT. Samkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 125

for them may remain. Even the desire is lost when the Supreme
is seen.t The control should be both on the body and the mind.
Liberation from the tyranny of the body is not enough; we
must be liberated from the tyranny of desires also,

60. yatato hy api kaunteya
purusasya vipascitah
indriyani pramathini
haranti prasabham manah
(60) Even though a man may ever strive (for perfection)
and be ever so discerning, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), his
impetuous senses will carry off his mind by force.

61. tant sarvani samyamya
yukta dsita matparah
vaSe hi yasye ’ndriyani
tasya prajna pratisthita
(6x) Having brought all (the senses) under control, he should
remain firm in yoga intent on Me; for he, whose senses are
under control, his intelligence is firmly set.

matparah: another reading is tatparah.

Self-discipline is not a matter of intelligence. It is a matter
of will and emotions. Self-discipline is easy when there is vision
of the Highest. See XII, 5. The original Yoga was theistic. Cp.
also Yoga Sitra, I, 24. hlesakarmavipakasayair aparamystah
purusavisesa isvarah.

62. dhyayato visayan pumsah
sangas tesit "pajdyate
sangat sarnjayate kamah
kamat krodho ’bhijayate
(62) When a man dwells in his mind on the objects of sense,
attachment to them is produced. From attachment springs
desire and from desire comes anger.
1 Cp. Kalidasa: ‘‘They whose minds are not disturbed when the
sources of disturbance are present, are the truly brave.”
vikdrahetau sati vikriyante

yest na cetansi ta eva dhivah.
Kumarasambhava, I, 59.126 The Bhagavadgita

kama: desire. Desires may prove to be as resistless as the most
powerful external forces. They may lift us into glory or hurl us
into disgrace.

63. krodhdd bhavati sarmohah
sammohat smrtivibhramah
smrtibhramsad buddhinaso
buddhinasat pranasyati

(63) From anger arises bewilderment, from bewilderment
loss of memory; and from loss of memory, the destruction
of intelligence and from the destruction of intelligence he
perishes.

buddhindsa; destruction of intelligence. It is failure to dis-
criminate between right and wrong.

When the soul is overcome by passion, its memory is lost, its
intelligence is obscured and the man is ruined. What is called
for is not a forced isolation from the world or destruction of sense
life but an inward withdrawal. To hate the senses is as wrong
as to love them. The horses of senses are not to be unyoked from
the chariot but controlled by the reins of the mind.

64. ragadvesaviyuktais tu
visayan indriyais caran
atmavasyair vidheyatma
prasadam adhigacchati

(64) But a man of disciplined mind, who moves among the
objects of sense, with the senses under control and free from
attachment and aversion, he attains purity of spirit.

See V, 8. The sthitaprajiia has no selfish aims or personal liopes.
He is not disturbed by the touches of outward things. He accepts
what happens without attachment or repulsion. He covets noth-
ing, is jealous of none. He has no desires and makes no demands."

+ Cp. with this the following description of disciplined seers or
ris.
tivdl.varetas tapasyugro niyatast ca samyami
sapanugrahayos saktah satyasandho bhaved rsip
taponirdhitapipmanah yathatathyabhi
vedavedangatattvajna rsayah parikirtitah11 Sétakhya Theory ana Yoga Practice 127

65. prasade sarvaduhkhanam
hanir asyo ’pajayate
prasannacetaso hy asu

buddhih paryavatisthate

(65) And in that purity of spirit, there is produced for him
an end of all sorrow; the intelligence of such a man of pure
spirit is soon established (in the peace of the self).

66 nd ‘sti buddhir ayuktasya
na ca 'yuktasya bhavana
na ca ’bhavayatah santir
asantasya kutah sukham

(66) For the uncontrolled, there is no intelligence; nor for
the uncontrolled is there the power of concentration and
for him without concentration, there is no peace and for the
unpeaceful, how can there be happiness?

67. wndriyanam hi caratan
yan mano ’nuvidhiyate
tad asya harati prajnam
vayuy navam iva ‘mbhasi
(67) When the mind runs after the roving senses, it carries
away the understanding, even as a wind carries away a
ship on the waters

68. tasmad yasya mahdbaho
nigrhitani sarvasah .
indriyant ndriyarthebhyas
tasya prajha pratisthita
(68) Therefore,O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), he whose senses
are all withdrawn from their objects his intelligence is
firmly set. ‘
69. ya misa sarvabhitanam
tasyam jagarti samyami
yasyam jagrati bhitant
Sa ni$a pasyato munch
(69) What is night for all beings is the time of waking for128 The Bhagavadgita

the disciplined soul; and what is the time of waking for all
beings is night for the sage who sees (or the sage of vision).

When all beings are attracted by the glitter of sense-objects,
the sage is intent on understanding reality. He is wakeful to the
nature of reality to which the unwise is asleep or indifferent. The
life of opposites which is the day or condition of activity for the
unenlightened is night, a darkness of the soul to the wise. Cp.
Goethe: “Error stands in the same relation to truth as sleeping
to waking.”

90. apiiryamanam acalapratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvat
tadvat kama yam praviganti sarve
sa Santim apnoti na kimakami
(79) He unto whom all desires enter as waters into the sea,
which, though ever being filled is ever motionless, attains to
peace and not he who hugs his desires.

91. vihaya kiman yah sarvan
pumams carati nihsprhah
nirmamo nirahamkarah
sa Santim adhigacchati

(71) He who abandons all desires and acts free from longing,
without any sense of mineness or egotism, he attains to
peace.

Cp. the well-known saying of the Upanisad. “The human mind
is of two kinds, pure and impure. That which is intent on securing
its desires is impure; that which is free from attachment to desires
is pure.”"

cavati: acts. He freely and readily spends himself without
measure for something intuitively apprehended as great and
noble.

$antim; peace; the suppression of all the troubles of earthly
existence.?

* mano ht duwidhani proktarh Suddharh cdsuddham eva ca
asuddhar: kamasarkalpan Suddharm hamavivarjitam.
+ sarvasamsaraduhkhoparamatvalaksanam, nirvanakhyam. §,Il Samkhya Theory and Yoga Practice 129

72. esd brahmi sthitih partha
nai nam prapya vimuhyati
sthitvd ’sydm antakale pi
brahmanirvdnam rcchati

(72) This is the divine state (brahmisthiti) O Partha (Arjuna),
‘having attained thereto, one is (not again) bewildered; fixed
in that state even at the end (at the hour of death) one can
attain to the bliss of God (brahmanirvana).

brahmisthiti: life eternal.

nirvanam, moksam. S.

nirgatam vanarh gamanan yasmin prapye brahmani tan nirva-

nam. Nilakantha.

Nirvana has been used to indicate the state of perfection in
Buddhism. Dhammapada says: Health is the greatest gain, con-
tentment is the greatest wealth, faith is the best friend and
nirvana is the highest happiness.'

These saints have points in common with the superman of
Nietzsche, with the deity-bearers of Alexander. Joy, serenity, the
consciousness of inward strength and of liberation, courage and
energy of purpose and a constant life in God are their charac-
teristics. They represent the growing point of human evolution.
They proclaim, by their very existence, character and conscious-
ness, that humanity can rise above its assumed limitations, that
the tide of evolution is pushing forward to a new high level. They
give us the sanction of example and expect us to rise above our
present selfishness and corruption.

Wisdom is the supreme means of liberation, but this wisdom

* 204. See also’M.B., 14, 543.
vihaya sarvasarhkaipan buddhya sartramanasan
sa vai niurvanam &pnoti nirindhana wanalap.

Cp. Plato: “If the soul takes its departure in a state of purity,
not carrying with it any clinging impurities which during life, it
never willingly shared in, but always avoided; gathering itself into
itself and making this separation from the body its aim and study
. . . well then, so prepared the soul departs to that invisible region
of the Divine, the Immortal, and the wise.” Phaedo, Sec. 68.

The descriptions of the ideal man, the jfianin, the sthitaprajfia, the
yogariidha, the gunatita or the bhakta agree in all essentials. See
‘VI, 4-32; X, 9-10; XII, 13~20; XII, 7-11; XIV, 21-35; XVI, 1-35
XVII, 50-60.130 The Bhagavadgita

is not exclusive of devotion to God and desireless work. Even
while alive, the sage rests in Brahman, and is released from the
unrest of the world. The sage of steady wisdom lives a life of
disinterested service.

itt... saskhyayogo nama dvitiyo ‘dhydyah
This is the second chapter entitled The Yoga of Knowledge.CHAPTER III

Karma Yoga or the Method of Work

Why then work at all?

arjuna uvaca
I jydyasi cet karmanas te
mata buddhir janardana
tat kin Rarmani ghore mam
niyojayast kesava

Arjuna said:

(1) If thou deemest that (the path of) understanding is
more excellent than (the path of) action, O Janardana
(Krsna), why then dost thou urge me to do this savage
deed, O Keéava (Krsna)?

Arjuna misunderstands the teaching that work for reward is
less excellent than work without attachment and desire and
believes that Krsna is of the view that knowledge without action
is better than work and asks, if you think that knowledge is
superior to action, why do you ask me to engage in this frightful
work? If the Sarhkhya method of gaining wislom is superior,
then action is an irrelevance.

2. vyamisrene va vakyena
buddhirn mohayasi ‘va me
tad cham vada msScitya
yena Sreyo "ham apnuyam
(2) With an apparently confused utterance thou seemest
to bewilder my intelligence. Tell (me) then decisively the
one thing by which I can attain to the highest ‘good.

iva: confusion is only seeming. It is not the intention of the
teacher to confuse Arjuna but Arjuna is confused.t

1 pavamakdrunikasya tava mohahatvars ndsty eva, tathapi bhrEntya
mamaivam bhatiti’vasabdenoktiam. Sridhara.132 The Bhagavadgita
Life is Work; Unconcern for Resulis is Needful
Sribhagavan uvaca
3. loke’smin dvividha nistha
pura prokta maya nagha
jianayogena simkhyanam
Rarmayogena yoginam
The Blessed Lord said:
(3) O, blameless One, in this world a two-fold way of life
has been taught of yore by Me, the path of knowledge for
men of contemplation and that of works for men of action.

The teacher distinguishes, as modern psychologists do, two main
types of seekers, introverts whose natural tendency is to explore
the inner life of spirit and extroverts whose natural bias is towards
work in the outer world. Answering to these, we have the yoga
of knowledge, for those whose inner being is bent towards flights
of deep spiritual contemplation, and the yoga of action for ener-
getic personalities with love of action. But this distinction is not
ultimate, for all men are in different degrees both introverts and
extroverts.

For the Gita, the path of works is a means of liberation quite
as efficient as that of knowledge, and these are intended for two
classes of people. They are not exclusive but complementary. The
path is one whole including different phases. Cp. “Such are the
two modes of life, both of which are supported by the Vedas—
the one is the activistic path; the other that of renunciation.”
The two modes of life are of equal value. The teacher points
out that jfiana or wisdom is not incompatible with karma or
action. $. admits that work is compatible with enlightenment.
Work is adopted not as a means to the gaining of wisdom but
as an example to the ordinary people. In the work of the en-
lightened as in that of the teacher of the Gi/d, the self-sense and
expectation of reward are absent.*

+ dudv imav atha panthanau yasmin vedah pratisthitah
pravrttilaksano dharmah nivrttts ca vibhasitah.
MB., ‘Sintiparva, 240, 6,
» Abhinavagupta quotes this verse.
na kriyérahitar jadnam na jidnarahita hriya
jianakniydvinispannah acaryah pa upasaha.
S.B.G., II, 11.III. Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 133

4. na karmanam anavambhan
naiskarmyam puruso ’Snute
na ca saninyasandd eva
siddhint samadhigacchati

(4) Not by abstention from work does a man attain freedom
from action; nor by mere renunciation does he attain to his
perfection.

Naiskarmya is the state where one is unaffected by work. The
natural Jaw is that we are bound by the results of our actions.
Every action has its natural reaction and so is a source of bondage
committing the soul to the world of becoming and preventing
its union with the Supreme through the transcendence of the
world. What is demanded is not renunciation of works, but
renunciation of selfish desire.

5. na hi kascit ksanam api
jatu tisthaty akarmakyt
karyate hy avasah karma
sarvah prakrtijair gunaih

(5) For no one can remain even for a moment without doing
work; every one is made to act helplessly by the impulses
born of nature.

So long as we lead embodied lives, we cannot escape from
action. Without work life cannot be sustained.t Anandagiri
points out that he who knows the self is not moved by the gunas,
but he who has not controlled the body and the senses.is driven
to action by the gunas.

By implication the view that the released soul ceases to work,
as all work is a derogation from the supreme state, a return to
ignorance, is rejected. While life remains, action is unavoidable.
Thinking is an act; living is an act—and these acts cause many
effects. To be free from desire, from the illusion of personal interest,
is the true non-action and not the physical abstention from

* Cp. “The eye cannot choose but see,
‘We cannot bid the ear be still,
Our bodies feel where’er they be
Against or with our will.”
Wordsworth,134 The Bhagavadgita

activity. When it is said that works cease for a man who is
liberated, all that is meant is that he has no further personal
necessity for works. It does not mean that he flees from action
and takes refuge in blissful inaction. He works as God works,
without any binding necessity or compelling ignorance, and even
in performing work, he is not involved. When his egoism is
removed, action springs from the depths and is governed by the
Supreme secretly seated in his heart. Free from desire and attach-
ment, one with all beings, he acts out of the profoundest depths
of his inner being, governed by his immortal, divine, highest self.

6. karmendriyam samyamya
ja dste manasd smaran
indriyarthan vimighatma
mithyacérah sa ucyate
(6) He who restrains his organs of action but continues in
his mind to brood over the objects of sense, whose nature is
deluded is said to be a hypocrite (a man of false conduct).
We may control outwardly our activities but if we do not
restrain the desires which impel them, we have failed to grasp
the true meaning of restraint.

7. yas tv indriyagr manasa
niyamya 'vabhate 'rjuna
karmendriyaih karmayogam
asakiah sa visisyate

(7) But he who controls the senses by the mind, O Arjuna,
and without attachment engages the organs of action in the
path of work, he is superior.

The human will can triumph over the rigidity of law. We
should not look upon the things of the world as means to our
satisfaction. If we are to recover our lost equanimity, our lost
integrity, our lost innocence we must see all things as mani-
festations of the Real and not aseobjects to be grasped and
possessed. To develop this attitude of non-attachment to things,
contemplation is essential.

In verse 6 the Lord condemns mere outer renunciation and
in this verse commends the true spirit of inward detachment.iil. Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 135

The Importance of Sacrifice

8. niyatan kuru karma toarh
karma jyayo hy akarmanah
Sarivayaiva pi ca te
na prasidhyed akarmanah
(8) Do thou thy allotted work, for action is better than
inaction; even the maintenance of thy physical life cannot
be effected without action

9. yanarthat karmano 'nyatra
loko ’yam karmabandhanah
tadartham karma kaunteya
muktasaigah samacara

(9) Save work done as and for a sacrifice this world is in
bondage to work. Therefore, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), do
thy work as a sacrifice, becoming free from all attachment.

S. equates yajfia with Visnu.

R. interprets it literally as sacrifice,

All work is to be done in a spirit of sacrifice, for the sake of
the Divine. Admitting the Mimamsi demand that we should
perform action for the purpose of sacrifices, the Gita asks us to
do such action without entertaining any hope of reward. In such
cases the inevitable action has no binding power. Sacrifice itself
is interpreted in a larger sense. We have to sacrifice the lower
mind to the higher. The religious duty towards the Vedic gods
here becomes service of creation in the name of the Supreme.

10. sahayajiah prajah systua
puro ’vaca prajapatih
anena prasavisyadhvam
esa vo ’stv istakamadhuk

(to) In ancient days the Lord of creatures created men along
with sacrifice and said, ‘By this shall ye bring forth and
this shall be unto you that which will yield the milk of your
desires.”

Kamadhuk is the mythical cow of Indra from which one can
get all one desires, By doing one’s allotted duty one can be saved.136 The Bhagavadgita

11. devan bhavayata 'nena
te devé bhavayantu vah
parasparam bhavayantah
Sreyah param avapsyatha

(tz) By this foster ye the gods and let the gods foster you;
thus fostering each other you shall attain to the supreme
good.

See M.B., Santiparva, 340, 59-62, where the mutual dependence
of gods and men is described in similar terms.

12, stan bhogén hi vo deva
dasyante yajnabhavitah
tair dattin apradiyai ’bhyo
yo bhunkte stena eva sah

(12) Fostered by sacrifice the gods will give you the enjoy-
ments you desire. He who enjoys these gilts without giving
to them in return is verily a thief.

13. yajnasistasinah santo
mucyante sarvakilbisath
bhufjate te tv aghams papa
ye pacanty atmakaranat

(13) The good people who eat what is left from the sacrifice
are released from all sins but those wicked people who
prepare food for their own sake—verily they eat sin.

Cp. Manu, III, 76, 118."

14. annad bhavants bhiitini
parjanyad annasambhavah
yaynad bhavati parjanyo
yajiiah karmasamudbhavah
(14) From food creatures come into being; from rain is the
birth of food; from sacrifice rain comes into being and
sacrifice is born of work.
Cp. Manu, III, 76.

"Cp. Rg. Veda. kevaligho bhavati kevalads. X, 117, 6.III Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 137

15. karma brahmodbhavam viddhi

brahma ’ksarasamudbhavam
tasmat sarvagatarn brahma

nityam yajite pratisthitam

(13) Know the origin of karma (of the nature of sacrifices)
to be in Brahma (the Veda) and the Brahma springs from
the Imperishable. Therefore the Brahma, which comprehends
all, ever centres round the sacrifice.

Action is rooted in the Imperishable. But for the action of the
Supreme, the world will fall into ruin. The world is a great
sacrifice. We read in the Rg Veda (X, go) that the One Purusa
was offered as a sacrifice and his limbs were scattered to all the
quarters of space. By this great sacrifice, the world’s pattern is
kept up. Action is a moral as well as a physical necessity for
embodied beings.

Brahma is also taken to be prakrti as in XIV, 3-4. Nature
springs from the Divine and the entire activity of the world is
traceable to it. -

16. evam pravartitam cakram
na 'nuvartayatt ha yah
aghayur indriyaramo
mogham partha sa jivatt

(16) He who does not, in this world, help to turn the wheel
thus set in motion, is evil in his nature, sensual in his
delight, and he, O Partha (Arjuna), lives in vain.

In these verses the Vedic conception of sacrifice as an inter-
change between gods and men is set in the larger context-of the
interdependence of beings in the cosmos. The deeds done in the
sacrificial spirit are pleasing to God. God is the enjoyer of all
sacrifices.? yajfio vai visnuh.3 Sacrifice is the Supreme. It is also
the law of life. The individual and the cosmos depend on each
other. There is a constant interchange between human life and
world life. He who works for himself lives in vain. The world is

« Sridhara says: yajamanddt vydpararipam karma brahma vedah;
karma tasmal pravrttam.

See V, 29. 4 Taittiriya Samhita, I, 7, 4.138 The Bhagavadgita

in progress because of this co-operation between the human and
the divine. Only the sacrifice is not to the deities but to the
Supreme of whom the deities are varied forms. In IV, 24, it is said
that the act and the materials of the sacrifice, the giver and the
receiver, the goal and the object of the sacrifice are all Brahman

Be Satisfied in the Self
17. yas tv Gtmaratir eva syad
atmaty plas ca ridnavah
dimany eva ca samtustas
tasya karyart na vidyate
(t7) But the man whose delight is in the Self alone, who is
content with the Self, who is satisfied with the Self, for him
there exists no work that needs to be done.
He is freed from a sense of duty. He works not out of a sense
of duty or for the progressive transformation of his being but
because his perfected nature issues spontaneously in action.

18. nai ’va tasya kytena ’rtho
na 'kytene ’ha kascana
na cé’sya sarvabhiitest

hascid arthavyapasravah
(18) Similarly, in this world he has no interest whatever to
gain by the actions that he has done and none to be gained
by the actions that he has not done. He does not depend on
all these beings for any interest of his.

The next verse indicates that, though the liberated man has
nothing to gain by action or non-action and is perfectly happy
in the possession and enjoyment of Self, there is such a thing as
lesireless action which he undertakes for the welfare of the world.

19. tasmad asaktah satatam
héryam karma samacara
asakto hy acaran karma
param apnoti pitrusah
(19) Therefore, without attachment, perform always the
work that has to be done, for man attains to the highest by
doing work without attachment.III. Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 139

Here work done without attachment is marked as superior to
work done in a spirit of sacrifice which is itself higher than work
done with selfish aims. Even the emancipated souls do work as
the occasion arises." .

While this verse says that the man reaches the Supreme,
param, performing actions, without attachment, S$. holds that
karma helps us to attain purity of mind which leads to salvation.
It takes us to perfection indirectly through the attainment of
purity of mind ?

Set an Example to Others

20 karmanai'va hi samsiddhim
asthita janakadayah
lokasamgraham eva ’pi

sampasyan Rartum arhasi

(20) It was even by works that Janaka and others attained
to perfection. Thou shouldst do works also with a view to the
maintenance of the world.

Janaka was the king of Mithila and father of Sita, the wife of
Rama. Janaka ruled, giving up his personal-sense of being the
worker. Even S. says that Janaka and others worked lest people
at large might go astray, convinced that their senses were engaged
in activity, guna gunesu vartante. Even those who have not
known the truth might adopt works for self-purification. II, 10.

lokasamgraha: world-maintenance. Lokasarhgraha stands for
the unity of the world, the interconnectedness of society. If the
world is not to sink into a condition of physical misery and moral
degradation, if the common life is to be decent and dignified,
religious ethics must control social action. The aim of religion
is to spiritualize society, to establish a brotherhood on earth.

‘Cp. Yogavasistha. ‘The knower has nothing to gain either by
performing or by abstaining from action. Therefore he performs
action as it arises.” Again, ‘To me it is just the same whether
something is done or not. Why should I insist on not performing
action? I perform whatever comes to me.”

piasya narthah kharmatyagaih nivthah karmasamasrayarh

tena sthitam yatha yad yat tat tathaiva karoty asau, VI, 199.

mama nasti kytendrtho nahkyteneha kascana

yatha praptena tistham hy akarmant ka dgrahah. Ibid., 216,
* sattvasuddhidvarena. See also S.B.G., III, 4.140 The Bhagavadgita

We must be inspired by the hope of embodying ideals in earthly
institutions. When the Indian world lost its youth, it tended to
become other-worldly. In a tired age we adopt the gospel of
renunciation and endurance. In an age of hope and energy we
emphasize activeservice in theworld and the saving of civilization.
Boethius affirms that ‘“‘he will never go to heaven who is content
to go alone.”

ai. yad-yad acarati Sresthas
tad-tad eve taro janah
sa yat pramnanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
(21) Whatsoever a great man does, the same is done by
others as well. Whatever standard he sets, the world follows.

Common people imitate the standards set by the elect. Democ-
racy has become confused with disbelief in great men. The Gita
points out that the great men are the pathmakers who blaze the
trail that other men follow. The light generally comes through
individuals who are in advance of society. They see the light
shining on the mountain heights while their fellows sleep in the
valley below. They are, in the words of Jesus, the “salt,” the
“Jeaven,” the “light” of human communities. When they proclaim
the splendour of that light, a few recognize it and slowly the
many are persuaded to follow them.

22, na me partha ’sti kartavyam
trisu lokesu kimcana
na ‘navaptam avaplavyam
varta eva ca karmani

(22) There is not for me, O Partha (Arjuna), any work in
the three worlds which has to be done nor anything to be
obtained which has not been obtained; yet I am engaged
in work.

Life of God and life of the world are not opposed to each other."

« Cp. MB. In the name of my lordship, I slave for the whole
world, dasyam aisvaryavadena jiatindm tu Ravomy aham.
Cp. M.B., IIT, 313, 17.
tarko’pratisthah srutayo vibkinnd naiko munir yasya vacah
pramainam
dharmasya tattvam nikitam guhayam mahdjano yena gaiah sa
panthah.III Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 141

23 yadi hy aharn na varteyam
jatu karmany atandritah
mama vartma 'nuvartante
manusyah partha sarvasah

(23) For, if ever I did not engage in work unwearied, O
Partha (Arjuna), men in every way follow my path.

24, utsideyur ime loka ,
na kurydrn karma ced aham
Sartkarasya ca karta syam
upahanyam imah prajah
(24) If I should cease to work, these worlds would fall in
ruin and I should be the creator of disordered life and
destroy these people.

God, by His incessant activity, preserves the world and pre-
vents it from falling back into non-existence.t

25. saktak karmany avidvdmso
yathé kurvanti bhavata
kuryad vidvams tatha ’saktas
etkirsur lokasamgraham

(25) As the unlearned act from attachment to their work,
so should the learned also act, O Bharata (Arjuna), but
without any attachment, with the desire to maintain/the
world-order.

Though the soul which is centred in the light has nothing
further to accomplish for itself, it unites itself with the cosmic
action, even as the Divine does. Its activity will be inspired
by the light and joy of the Supreme.

26. na buddhibhedam janayed
ajiidnam karmasanginam
josayet sarvakarmani

mdvan yuktah samdacaran
1 Cp St. Thomas: “As the production of a thing into existence
depends on the will of God, so likewise it depends on His will that
things should be preserved; hence if He took away His action from
them, all things would be reduced to nothing.” Summa Theol. 1, 1X, 2c.142 The Bhagavadgita

(26) Let him (jfidnin) not unsettle the minds of the ignorant
who are attached to action. The enlightened man doing all
works in a spirit of yoga, should set others to act (as well).

na buddhibhedam janayet: let him not unsettle the minds. Do
not weaken religious devotion of any kind. The elements of duty,
sacrifice and love seem to be the foundation of every religion.
In the lower forms, they may be barely discernible and may
centre round certain symbols which are accessories to the prin-
ciples which they uphold. These symbols are vital to those who
believe in them. They become intolerable only if they are imposed
‘on those who cannot accept them and when they are suggested
to be absolute and final forms of human thought. The absolute
character of theological doctrine is incompatible with the mys-
terious character of religious truth. Faith is wider than belief.
Again, if we know the better and do not adopt it, then we commit
a wrong.

‘When the illiterate bow down to forces of nature, we know
that they are bowing to the wrong thing and they are blind
to the larger unity of Godhead. And yet they bow to some-
thing which is not their little self. Even crude views possess
something by which men and women who want to live rightly
are helped to do so. Traditional forms charged with historical
associations are the vehicles of unspoken convictions, though they
may not be well understood. The quality of mind and not the
object determines whether the source is religious or not. It is true
that every one should reach the highest level but this can be at-
tained generally by slow steps and not by sudden jumps. Besides,
our views of religion are not chosen by us. They are determined
by our ancestry, upbringing and general environment. We should
not speak contemptuously of them. We must approach the fol-
lowers of simple faiths with reverence and not heedlessly disturb
them, for the simple faiths have practical value and spiritual
appeal. Modern anthropologists advise us that we should not,
in our anxiety to “uplift” the aborigines, deprive them of their
innocent joys, their songs and dances, their feasts and festivals.
Whatever we should like to do for them, we should do with love
and reverence. We must use their restricted apprehensions as
steps to the larger vision.

Adopting the view that we should not throw out dirty water
‘itil we get in fresh, the Hindu pantheon has accommodatedIIL. Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 143,

divinities worshipped by the different groups, those of the sky and
the sea, the stream andthe grove, the legendary figuresof the distant
past and the tutelary gods and goddesses of villages. In its anxiety
to lose nothing in the march of ages, to harmonize every sincere
conviction without renouncing any, it has become an immense
synthesis combining within itself varied elements and motives.
It is not surprising that the religion is full of superstitions, dark
and primitive.

The Self is no Doer

27. prakrteh kriyamanant
gunath karmani sarvasah
ahamkavavimiadhatma
karta *ham iti manyate

  

(27) While all kinds of work are done by the modes of nature,
he whose soul is bewildered by the self-sense thinks ‘‘I am
the doer.”

prakrteh: pradhana of the Sarhkhya.' It is the power of maya,?
or the power of the Supreme God.3

The deluded soul attributes the acts of prakrti to itself.¢

There are different planes of our conscious existence and the
self which becomes the ego attributes to itself the agency for
actions forgetting the determinism of nature. According to the
Gita, when the ego soul is entirely subject to nature, it does not
act freely. Body, life and mind belong to the side of the environ-
ment.

28. tattvavit tu mahabaho
gunakarmavibhagayoh

gund gunesu vartania

iti matva na sajjate

1 prakytih pradhdnam sattvarajastamasam gundnam samyavastha. §.

2 pradhanasabdena maydsahtir ucyate. Anandagiri.

3 prakrich paramesvaryah sattvarajastamogunatmikavah, devatma-
Saktira svagunair nigidham iti srutiprasiddhayah Sakter gunaih,
haryaharanasanghdtatmakaih, Nilakantha.

prakytir maya sativarajastamogunamayi mithydjndndtmika pira-
mesvari Saktih. Madhusidana.

4 anatmany dtmabhimant. Madhustdana.144 The Bhagavadgita

(28) But he who knows the true character of the two dis-
tinctions (of the soul) from the modes of nature and their
works, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), understanding that it is
the modes which are acting on the modes, does not get
attached.

Prakyti and its modes represent the limits of human freedom
such as the force of heredity and the pressure of environment.
The empirical self is the product of works even as the whole
cosmic process is the result of the operation of causes,

29. prakyter gunasammidhah
sajjante gunakarmasu
tan akytsnavido mandan
hrtsnavin na vicdlayet

(29) Those who are misled by the modes of nature get
attached to the works produced by them. But let no one
who knows the whole unsettle the minds of the ignorant
who know only a part. .

We should not disturb those who act under the impulsion of
nature. They should be slowly delivered from the false identi-
fication of the self with the ego subject to nature. The true self
is the divine, eternally free and self-aware. The false self is the
ego which is a part of nature, which reflects the workings of
prakrti. Here the true self; on the Sarhkhya analysis, is described
as inactive, while prakrti is active and when purusa identifies
itself with the activity of prakrti, the sense of active personality
is produced. The Gita does not support the Sarhkhya view of the
withdrawal of purusa from prakrti by complete inaction. Dis-
cernment does not imply inaction but it involves action done in
a way that does not hinder the attainment of release. If we
realize that the atman or the true self is the detached witness,
serene and impartial, no action binds us, though we engage in
the great battle against imperfection and sorrow and work for
world solidarity.

30. mayi sarvani karmani
sarimyasya 'dhyatmacetasa
nirasiy nirmamo bhiitua
yudhyasva vigatajvarahIII. Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 145

(30) Resigning all thy works to Me, with thy consciousness
fixed in the Self, being free from desire and egoism, fight,
delivered from thy fever.

By self-surrender to the Lord who presides over cosmic exis-
tence, and activity, we must engage in work. “Thy will be done”
is to be our attitude in all work. We must do the work with the
sense that we are the servants of the Lord. See XVIII, 59-60
and 66.

31. ye me matam idan nityam
anutisthanti manavah
Sraddhavanto ’nasiiyanto
mucyante te’pi karmabhih

(31) Those men, too, who, full of faith and free from cavil,
constantly follow this teaching of Mine are released from
(the bondage of) works.

32 ye tv etad abhyasityanto
na 'nutisthanti me matam
sarvajhinavimiidhams tin
viddhi nastan acetasah

(32) But those who slight My teaching and do not follow it,
know them to be blind to all wisdom, lost and senseless.

Nature and Duty

33 sadrsam cestate svasyah
prakrter jianavan api
prakrtim yanti bhitam
nigrahah kim karisyatt
(33) Even the man of knowledge acts in accordance with
his own nature. Beings follow their nature. What can
tepression accomplish?
1 aham kartesvardya bhytyaval karomity anaya buddhya. §.
Hvarapreritohamt haromity anaya buddhya Nilakantha.

mays sarvan: harmini naharh kavtet wyasya svalantrah parame-
Svava eva sarvakarta naham kascid iti niécitya. Abhinavagupta.146 The Bhagavadgita

Prakrti is the mental equipment with which one is born, as
the result of the past acts.t This must run its course. S. thinks
that even God cannot prevent its operation. Even He ordains
that the past deeds produce their natural effects.

Restraint cannot avail since actions flow inevitably from the
workings of prakrti and the self is only an impartial witness.

This verse seems to suggest the omnipotence of nature over
the soul and requires us to act according to our nature, the law
of our being. It does not follow that we should indulge in every
impulse. It is a call to find out our true being and give expression
to it. We cannot, even if we will, suppress it. Violated nature
will take its revenge.

34. indriyasye ’ndriyasya ’rthe
ragadvesau vyavasthitau
tayor na vasam agacchet
tau hy asya paripanthinau

(34) For (every) sense attachment and aversion are fixed
(in regard) to the objects of (that) sense. Let no one come
under their sway for they are his (two) waylayers.

Men should act according to buddhi or understanding. If we
are victims of our impulses, our life is as aimless and devoid of
intelligence as that of the animals. If we do not interfere, attach-
ments and aversions will determine our acts. So long as we act
in certain ways because we like them and abstain from others
because we dislike them, we will be bound by our actions. But
if we overcome these impulses and act from a sense of duty, we
are not victims of the play of prakrti. The exercise of human
freedom is conditioned and not cancelled by the necessities of
nature.

35. Sreyan svadharmo vigunah
paradharmat svanusthitat
svadharme nidhanam Sveyah
paradharmo bhayavahah
(35) Better is one’s own law though imperfectly carried out
' prakytiv nama piarvahrtadharmadharmadisamskaro vartamana-
janmadav abhivyaktah. §.
2 aham api pirvakarmapeksayaiva tan pravartayamiti bhavah.
Nilakantha.III Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 147

than the law of another carried out perfectly. Better is
death in (the fulfilment of) one’s own law for to follow
another’s law is perilous

There is more happiness in doing one’s own work even without
excellence than in doing another’s duty well. Each one must try
to understand his psychophysical make-up and function in
accordance with it. It may not be given to all of us to lay the
foundations of systems of metaphysics or clothe lofty thoughts
in enduring words. We have not all the same gifts, but what is
vital is not whether we are endowed with five talents or only
one but how faithfully we have employed the trust committed
to us. We must play our part, manfully, be it great or small.
Goodness denotes perfection of quality. However distasteful one’s
duty may be, one must be faithful to it even unto death.

The Enemy is Desire and Anger
arjuna uvaca
36. atha kena prayukto ‘yam
papam carati pirusah
anicchann api varsneya
halad iva niyojitah
Arjuna said*
(36) But by what is a man impelled to commit sin, as if
by force, even against his will, O Varsneya (Krsna)?
anicchannapi: even against his will. This is what Arjuna feels,
that a man is forced to do things even against his will. But it
is not really so. Man tacitly gives his consent as the use of the
word kama or craving by the teacher in the next verse indicates.
S. says: what we speak of as the prakrti or the nature of a person
draws him to its course only through attachment and aversion."

svibhagavan uvaca
37 kama esa krodha esa
rajogunasamudbhavah
mahasano mahapapma
viddhy enam tha vairinam
‘ya hi purusasya prakyhh sd vagadvesapurassaraiva svakorye
purusam pravartayati. S B.G., ITI, 34.148 The Bhagavadgita

The Blessed Lord said:
(37) This is craving, this is wrath, born of the mode of
passion, all devouring and most sinful. Know this to be the
enemy here.

38. dhiimena ’vriyate vahnir

yatha darso malena ca

yatho 'lbena 'vrto garbkas

tatha tene dam adurtam

(38) As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror by dust, as an
embryo is enveloped by the womb, so is this covered by
that (passion).

idam, this: this wisdom. S.

Everything is enveloped by passion.

39. Gurtamn jianam etena
jitanino nityavaivina
kamariipena kaunteya
duspurend 'nalena ca
(39) Enveloped is wisdom, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), by this
insatiable fire of desire, which is the constant foe of the wise.

Cp. “Desire is never satisfied by the enjoyment of the objects
of desire; it grows more and more as does the fire to which fuel
is added.”

' na jain hamah hamandm upabhogena samyati
havisa hrsnavartmeva bhitya evabhivardhate.
Manu, Il, 94.

Cp. Spinoza: “For the things which men, to judge by their actions,
deem the highest good are Riches, Fame or Sensual pleasure. Of
these the last is followed by satiety and repentance, the other two
are never satiated; the more we have, the more we want; while the
Jove of fame compels us to order our lives by the opinions of others.
But if a thing is aot loved, no quarrels will arise concerning it, no
sadness will be feit if it perishes, no envy if another has it, in short
no disturbances of the mind. All these spring from the love of that
which passes away. But the love of a thing eternal and infinite fills
the mind wholly with joy, and 1s unmingled with sadness. Therefore
it is greatly to be desired, and to be sought with all our strength.”
De Intellectus Emendations. The fundamental social crime is appro-
priation in any form whatever, class privilege, race discrimination
or national egotism, for it involves pain to others. There is no answer
to Wordsworth,

“Nev er to blend our pleasure or our pride
With sorrow of the meanest thing that feels.”
Hort-Leap Wet.HII. Karma Yoga or the Method of Work 149

40. indriyani mano buddhir
asya ‘dhisthanam ucyate
étair vimohayaty esa
jhanam dvrtya dehinam

~(40) The senses, the mind and the intelligence are said to be
its seat. Veiling wisdom by these, it deludes the embodied
(soul).
41 tasmat tvam indriyany ddan
niyamya bharatarsabha
papmanam prajahi hy enam
jhanavijnanandsanam
(41) Therefore, O Best of Bharatas (Arjuna), control thy
senses from the beginning and slay this sinful destroyer of
wisdom and discrimination.

The wisdom of the Vedanta and the detailed knowledge of the
Sarkhya may be meant by jiiana and vijfiana. S. explains jfiana
as “knowledge of the self and other things acquired from the
scriptures and the teachers,” and vijfidna as “the personal
experience, anubhava, of the things so taught.”

For R., jfiana relates to tmasvariipa or the nature of the self
and vijfiana to atmaviveka or discriminatory knowledge of the
self. In the translation here given jfiana is taken as spiritual
wisdom and vijiiana as logical knowledge.

Sridhara supports both the interpretations.*

  

42. indriyani parany adhur
indriyebhyah param manah
manasas tu para buddhir
yo buddheh paratas tu sah

(42) The senses, they say, are great, greater than the senses
is the mind, greater than the mind is the intelligence but
greater than the intelligence is he.

Katha Up., III, 10; see also VI, 7. Consciousness must be
raised step by step. The higher we rise the more free we are. If

= yad va jaanari

1 jfanam atmavisayam, vijidnam sastriyam
Cp. Amarakosa:

Sastrachryopadesajam, vijninam nididhyasanaj
smokse dhih jaanam anyatra vijndnam silpasastrayoh.150 The Bhagavadgtta
we act under the sway of the senses, we are least free. We are
freer when we adopt the dictates of manas; still more free when
our manas is united with buddhi; we attain the highest freedom
when our acts are determined by buddhi suffused by the light
from beyond, the self.

This verse gives us a hierarchy of levels of consciousness.

43. evam buddheh param buddhva
samstabhya ’tmanam aimana
gahi Satrum mahabaho
kamariipam durasadam
(43) Thus knowing him who is beyond the intelligence,
steadying the (lower) self by the Self, smite, O Mighty-armed
(Arjuna), the enemy in the form of desire, so hard to get at

kama: desire. Control the restless ego by the light of the Eternal
Spiritual Self. He who knows becomes truly independent and
asks guidance from no other power except his inner light.

This chapter expounds the necessity for the performance of
work without any selfish attachment to results, with a view to
securing the welfare of the world, with the realization that agency
belongs to the modes of prakrti or to God himself. Such is the
view of Yamunacarya.?

iti... karmayogo nama trtiyo ‘dhyayah
This is the third chapter entitled The Yoga of Works.
« Cp. Admamaya eviyam purusah.

+ asahtyd lokaraksayai gunesvavopya kartytam
sarvesvare vd nyasyoRta trtiye harmakaryatd.CHAPTER IV
The Way of Knowledge

The Tradition of Jaana Yoga
Sribhagavan uvaca
I imam vivasvate yogam
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manuyr tksvakave ’bravit
The Blessed Lord said:
(1) I. proclaimed this imperishable yoga to Vivasvan;
Vivasvan told it to Manu and Manu spoke it to Iksvaku.t

2 evar paramparaprapiam
imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kélene *ha mahata
yogo nastah paramtapa
(2) Thus handed down from one to another the royal sages
knew it till that yoga was lost to the world through long
lapse of time, O Oppressor of the foe (Arjuna).
rajarsayah: royal sages. Rama, Krsna and Buddha were all
princes who taught the highest wisdom.
halena mahaté; by the great efflux of time. This teaching has
become obscured by the lapse of ages. To renovate the faith for
the welfare of humanity, great teachers arise. Krsna now gives
it to his pupil to reawaken faith in him and illumine his ignorance.
A tradition is authentic when it evokes an adequate response
to the reality represented by it. It is valid, when our minds thrill
and vibrate to it. When it fails to achieve this end, new teachers
arise to rekindle it.

3. sa eva ’’yam maya te ’'dya
yogah proktah purdianah
bhakto ’st me sakha cet
rahasyam hy etad uttamam
* Cp. M. B. Santiparva: 348 51-52
wetayugddau ca tato vivasvan manave dadau
manus ca lokabhytyartham sucayeksvadkave dadau
tksvdkund ca kathito vyapya lokan avasthitah152 The Bhagavadgita

(3) This same ancient yoga has been today declared to thee
by Me; for thou art My devotee and My friend; and this is
the supreme secret.

yogah purdtanah: ancient yoga. The teacher declares that he
is not stating any new doctrine but is only restoring the old
tradition, the eternal verity, handed down from master to pupil.
The teaching is a renewal, a rediscovery, a restoration of know-
ledge long forgotten. All great teachers like Gautama the Buddha
and Mahavira, $. and R. are content to affirm that they are
only restating the teachings of their former masters. Milindapattha
explains that it is an ancient way that had been lost that the
Buddha opens up again.t When the Buddha returns to his father’s
capital in an ascetic’s garb with a begging bowl in hand, his
father asks him: “Why is this?” and the answer comes: “My
father, it is the custom of my race.” The king in surprise asks:
“What race?” and the Buddha answers:

“The Buddhas who have been and who shall be;
Of these am I and what they did, I do,

And this, which now befalls, so fell before

That at his gate a king in warrior mail

Should meet his son, a prince in hermit weeds.”

The great teachers do not lay claim to originality but affirm
that they are expounding the ancient truth which is the final
norm by which all teachings are judged, the eternal source of all
religions and philosophies, the philosophia perennis, the sandtana
dharma, what Augustine calls the “wisdom that was not made;
but is at this present, as it hath ever been and so shall ever
be.”

bhaktosi me sakha ceti: Thou art My devotee and My friend.
Revelation is never closed. So long as the human heart has
qualities of devotion and friendship, God will disclose His secrets
to them. Divine self-communication is possible wherever we have
sincerity and a sense of need. Religious revelation is not a past
event; it is that which continues to be. It is possible for all
beings and not the privilege of a few. “Every one that is of the
Truth heareth my voice,” said Jesus to Pilate

' 217 ff.
2 Confessions, IX, 10,IV. The Way of Knowledge 153
arjuna uvaca
4. aparam bhavato janma
param janma vivasvatah
hatham etad vijaniyarn
tvam adau proktavan iti

Arjuna said:
(4) Laterwas Thy birth and earlier was the birth of Vivasvat.
How then am I to understand that thou didst declare it to
him in the beginning?
The Buddha claimed to have been the teacher of countless
Bodhisattvas in bygone ages. Saddharmapundarika, XV, 1. Jesus
said: “Before Abraham was, I am.” John viii, 58.

The Theory of Avatars

Sribhagavan uvaca
5. bahiini me vyatitant
janmani tava ca 'rjuna
tany aham veda sarvani
na tvam vettha paramtapa

The Blessed Lord said:
(5) Many are My lives that are past, and thine also, O
Arjuna; all of them I know but thou knowest not, O Scourge
of the foe (Arjuna).

6. ajo pi sann avyayaima
bhitindm isvaro ’pi san
prakrtim svim adhisthaya
sambhavamy dtmamayaya
(6) Though (I am) unborn, and My self (is) imperishable,
though (I am) the lord of all creatures, yet establishing
Myself in My own nature, I come into (empiric) being
through My power (maya).
The embodiments of human beings are not voluntary. Driven
by prakyti through ignorance, they are born again and again.154 The Bhagavadgita

The Lord controls prakrti and assumes embodiment through His
own free will. The ordinary birth of creatures is determined by
the force of prakrti, avasam prakrter vasat,s while the Lord takes
birth through his own power, dimaméayaya.

prakytim adhisthiya; establishing in My own nature. He uses
His nature in a way which is free from subjection to karma.
There is no suggestion here that the becoming of the one is a
mere appearance. It is intended realistically. It is an actual
becoming by may, “the capacity to render the impossible actual.”

§.’s view that “I appear to be born and embodied, through
My own power but not in reality unlike others” is not satis-
factory. Yogamaya refers to the free will of God, His sveccha,
His incomprehensible power. The assumption of imperfection by
perfection, of lowliness by majesty, of weakness by power is the
mystery of the universe. It is maya from the logical standpoint.

7. yadé-yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya

tada ’tmanam syjamy aham

(7) Whenever there is a decline of righteousness and rise
of unrighteousness, O Bharata (Arjuna), then I send forth
(create incarnate) Myself.

“Whenever righteousness wanes, and unrighteousness increases
the Almighty Lord, Hari, creates himself.”4 Wherever there is
a serious tension in life, when a sort of all-pervasive materialism
invades the hearts of human souls, to preserve the equilibrium,
an answering manifestation of wisdom and righteousness is
essential. The Supreme, though unborn and undying, becomes
manifest in human embodiment to overthrow the forces of
ignorance and selfishness.5

2 IX, 8 > karmapivatantryavahita, Sridhara.
3 sambhavami dehavin iva, jata iva, dimamdyaya dimano mayaya
na paramarthato lokavat.

4 yada-yadeha dharmasya ksayo vyddhis ca pipmanah
tada tu bhagavan isa atmanam syjate harih.
Bhagavata, IX, 24, 56.
5 Cp. Visnu Purana.
yatyavatirnam kysnakhyam param brahma navakrti.IV. The Way of Knowledge 155

Avatara means descent, one who has descended. The Divine
comes down to the earthly plane to raise it to a higher status.
God descends when man rises. The purpose of the avatar is to
inaugurate a new world, a new dharma. By his teaching and
example, he shows how a human being can raise himself to a
higher grade of life. The issue between right and wrong is a
decisive one. God works on the side of the right. Love and mercy
are ultimately more powerful than hatred and cruelty. Dharma
will conquer adharma, truth will conquer falsehood; the power
behind death, disease and sin will be overthrown by the reality
which is Being, Intelligence and Bliss.

Dharma literally means mode of being. It is the essential
nature of a being that determines its mode of behaviour. So long
as our conduct is in conformity with our essential nature, we are
acting in the right way. Adharma is nonconformity to our nature.
If the harmony of the world is derived from the conformity of
all beings to their respective natures, the disharmony of the
world is due to their nonconformity. God does not stand aside,
when we abuse our freedom and cause disequilibrium. He does
not simply wind up the world, set it on the right track and then
let it jog along by itself. His loving hand is steering it all the time.

The conception of dharma is a development of the idea of rta
which connotes cosmic as well as moral order in the Rg. Veda.
The rta which gives logical significance and ethical elevation to
the world is under the protection of Varuna. The god of the Gita,
is the upholder of righteousness Sasvatadharmagopta (XI, 18),
not a God beyond good and evil, remote and unconcerned with
man’s struggle with unrighteousness.

8. paritranaya sadhiinam
vinasiya ca duskrtam
dharmasamsthapanarthaya
sanibhavami yuge-yuge
(8) For the protection of the good, for the destruction of

the wicked and for the establishment of righteousness, I
ome into being from age to age.

It is the function of God as Visnu, the protector of the world,
to keep the world going on lines of righteousness. He assumes
dirth to re-establish right when wrong prevails.156 The Bhagavadgita

9. janma karma ca me divyam
evann yo vetti tativatah
tyakiva deham punarjanma
nat ti mam eti so ’rjuna
(9) He who knows thus in its true nature My divine birth
and works, is not born again, when he leaves his body but
comes to Me, O Arjuna.

Krsna as an avatar or descent of the Divine into the human
world discloses the condition of being to which the human souls
should rise. The birth of the birthless means the revelation of
the mystery in the soul of man.

The avatara fulfils a number of functions in the cosmic process.
The conception makes out that there is no opposition between
spiritual life and life in the world. If the world is imperfect
and ruled by the flesh and the devil, it is our duty to redeem
it for the spirit. The avatdra points out the way by which men
can rise from their animal to a spiritual mode of existence by
providing us with an example of spiritual life. The Divine nature
is not seen in the incarnation in its naked splendour but is
mediated by the instrumentality of manhood. The Divine great-
ness is conveyed to us in and through these great individuals.
‘Their lives dramatize for us the essential constituents of human
life ascending to the fulfilment of its destiny. The Bhdgavata
says, “The omnipresent Lord appears in the world, not only for
destroying the demoniac forces but also for teaching mortals.
How else could the Lord who is blissful in Himself experience
anxieties about Sita, etc.” . . . He knows hunger and thirst,
sorrow and suffering, solitude and forsakenness. He overcomes
them all and asks us to take courage from His example. He not
only teaches us the true doctrine by which we can die to our
separate temporal selfness and come to union with Timeless Spirit
but He offers Himself to be a channel of grace. By inviting souls
to trust and love Him, He promises to lead them to the knowledge
of the Absolute. The historical fact is the illustration of a process

* martyavatarast tha martyasiksanams
raksovadhayaiva na kevalan vibhoh
kuto ‘nyatha syad ramatah sva atmanak
sitakylani vyasanani’svarasya.

V, 19, 5.IV. The Way of Knowledge 157

ever unfolding in the heart of man. The avatdra helps us to
become what we potentially are. In Hindu and Buddhist systems
of thought, there is no servitude to one historic fact. We can all
rise to the divine status and the avataras help us to achieve
this inner realization. Cp. Gautama the Buddha: “Then the Blessed
One spoke and said, ‘Know Vasettha, that from time to time a
Tathagata is born into the world, a fully enlightened one, blessed
and worthy, abounding in wisdom and goodness, happy with the
knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to erring mortals,
a teacher of gods and men, a Blessed Buddha. He proclaims the
truth both in its letter and in its spirit, lovely in its origin, lovely
in its progress, lovely in its consummation. A higher life doth
he make known in all its purity and in all its perfectness.’”:
According to Mahayana Buddhism there have been many
previous Buddhas and Gautama would have a successor in
Mettreya (Maitreya). Gautama himself passed through many
births and acquired the qualities which enabled him to discover
the Truth. It is possible for others to do the same. We hear of
disciples taking the vow to attain the enlightenment of a Buddha.
These systems do not believe in any exclusive revelation at one
unique instant of time.

10. vitaragabhayakrodha
manmaya mam upasritah
bahavo jianatapasa
pita madbhavam agatah
(x0) Delivered from passion, fear and anger, absorbed in

Me, taking refuge in Me, many purified by the austerity of
wisdom, have attained to My state of being.

madbhavam, the supernatural being that 1 possess.

The purpose of incarnation is not simply to uphold the world
order but also to help human beings to become perfected in their
nature. The freed soul becomes on earth a living image of the
Infinite. The ascent of man into Godhead is also the purpose of

» Tevyja Sutta. Cp. Romans: ‘For if we have grown into him by
a death like his, we shall grow into him by a resurrection like his,
knowing as we do that our old self has been crucified with him in
order to crush the sinful body.”

VI. 6. Moffatt’s E.T.158 The Bhagavadgita

the descent of God into humanity. The aim of the dharma is this
perfection of man and the avatar generally declares that He is
the truth, the way and the life.

Ii. ye yatha mar prapadyante
tdms tathai "va bhajamy aham
mama varima 'nuvartante
manusyah partha sarvasah

(rr) As men approach me so do I accept them: men on all
sides follow my path, O Partha (Arjuna)

mama varima: My path; the way of worshipping Me.'

sarvasah: on all sides; sarvapraka@raih, in all ways. is another
rendering.

This verse brings out the wide catholicity of the Gi#d religion
God meets every aspirant with favour and grants to each his
heart’s desire. He does not extinguish the hope of any but helps
all hopes to grow according to their nature. Even those who
worship the Vedic deities with sacrifices and with expectation
of reward find what they seek by the grace of the Supreme. Those
who are vouchsafed the vision of truth convey it through symbols
to ordinary people who cannot look upon its naked intensity.
Name and form are used to reach the Formless. Meditation on
any favourite form? may be adopted. The Hindu thinkers are
conscious of the amazing variety of ways in which we may
approach the Supreme, of the contingency of all forms. They know
that it is impossible for any effort of logical reason to give us
a true picture of ultimate reality. From the point of view of
metaphysics (paramartha), no manifestation is to be taken as
absolutely true, while from the standpoint of experience (vyava-
hara), every one of them has some validity. The forms we worship
are aids to help us to become conscious of our deepest selves.
So long as the object of worship holds fast the attention of the
soul, it enters our mind and heart and fashions them. The impor-
tance of the form is to be judged by the degree in which it
expresses ultimate significance.

The Gita does not speak of this or that form of religion but

1 mamabhajanamaygam. Sridhara.
2 yathabhimatadhyana.IV. The Way of Knowledge 159

speaks of the impulse which is expressed in all forms, the desire
to find God and understand our relation to Him.

The same God is worshipped by all. The differences of concep-
tion arid approach are determined by local coiouring and social
adaptations. All manifestations belong to the same Supreme.

“Visnu is Siva and Siva is Visnu and whoever thinks they are
fifferent goes to hell. “He who is known as Visnu is verily Rudra

and he whois Rudra is Brahma. One entity functions as three gods

that is ee ane Udayanacarya writes:
“Whom the Saivas worsl iva, the Vedantins as Brahman,
the Buddhists as Buddha, the Naiyyayikas who specialize in
canons of knowledge as the chief agent, the followers of the Jaina
code as the ever free, the ritualists as the principle of law, may that
Hari, the lord of the three worlds, grant our prayers.”4 If he had
been writing in this age, he would have added “whom the
Christians devoted to work as Christ and the Mohammedans as
Allah,”5 God is the rewarder of all who diligently seek Him,

« Cp. “All worship was to him sacred, since he believed that in
its most degraded forms, among the most ignorant and foolish of
worshippers, there has yet been some true seeking after the Divine,
and that between these and the most glorious ritul or the highest
philosophic certainty there lies so small a space that we may believe
the Saints in paradise regard it with a smile.” Elizabeth Waterhouse,
Thoughts of a Tertiary; quoted in Evelyn Underhill, Worship (1937),
pt
2 harirapt mahadevo lingariipi janaydanah

isad apy antararm ndsti bhedakyn narakam vrajet. Brhanniradiya.

Cp. also Maitrayani Up. sa va esa ehas tridhabhiitah. See also
Atharva veda: The one lght manifests itself in various forms
"charh jyotiy bahudha vibhati. XIII, 3, 17.

3 yo vai visnuh sa vai rudro yo rudvah sa pitamahah

ehamiirtis trayo deva rudravisnupitamahah.

4 yar saivth samupdasate Siva iti brahmeti vedantinah
bauddhah buddha iti pramanapatavah karteti naiyyayikah
arhann ityatha jainasasanaratah armeti mimarnsakah
so’yam v0 vidadhatu vaichitaphalarh trailohyanatho harih.

$ kvaistudh hvistur iti hriyapararatah alleti mahammadah.

‘Abul Faz] describes the spirit of Akbar’s Universal Faith in these
words: “O God, in every temple I see people that scek Thee, and
in every language I hear spoken, people praise Thee. Polytheism
and Islam feel after Thee; each religion says ‘Thou art One, without
equal.’ If it be a mosque, people murmur the holy prayer and if it
be a Christian Church, people ring the bell from Love to Thee.
Sometimes I frequent the Christian cloister, sometimes the mosque.160 The Bhagavadgita

whatever views of God they may hold. The spiritually immature
are unwilling to recognize other gods than their own. Their
attachment to their creed makes them blind to the larger unity
of the Godhead. This is the result of egotism in the domain of
religious ideas. The Gita, on the other hand, affirms that though
beliefs and practices may be many and varied, spiritual realiza-
tion to which these are the means is one.

A strong consciousness of one’s own possession of the truth,
the whole truth and nothing but the truth added to a con-
descending anxiety for the condition of those who are in outer
darkness produces a state of mind which is not remote from that
of an inquisitor.

12. kanksantah karmanam siddhim
yajanta tha devatah
kstpram hi manuse loke
siddhir bhavati karmaja
(12) Those who desire the fruition of their works on earth
offer sacrifices to the gods (the various forms of the one
Godhead) for the fruition of works in this world of men is

very quick.
The Desireless Nature of God’s Work

13. caiu is a sian
—gunakarmavibhagasah
tasya kartavam api mam
viddhy akartaram avyayam

(13) The fourfold order was created by Me according to the
divisions of quality and work. Though I am its creator,
know Me to be incapable of action or change.

caturvarnyam; the fourfold order. The emphasis is on guna
(aptitude) and karma (function) and not jati (birth). The varna
or the order to which we belong is independent of sex, birth or

But it is Thou whom I search from temple to temple. Thy elect
have no dealings with either heresy or orthodoxy for neither of them
stands behind the screen of Thy truth. Heresy to the heretic; and
religion to the orthodox. But the dust of the rose petal belongs to
the heart of the perfume seller.” Blochmann, Aini Akbari, p. xxx.IV. The Way of Knowledge 161

breeding. A class determined by temperament and vocation is
not a caste determined by birth and heredity. According to the
M.B., the whole world was originally of one class but later it
became divided into four divisions on account of the specific
duties" Even thedistinetion—betweencaste and outcast is”
artificial and_unspiritual—Am ancient verse points out that the
Brahmin and the outcaste are blood brothers.» In the M.B.,

Yudhisthira says that it is difficult to find out the caste of persons
on account of the mixture of castes. Men beget offspring in all

sorts of women. So conduct is only dete
caste according to sagés.3
The fourfold order is designed for human evolution. There is

nothing absolute about the caste system which has changed its
character in the process of history. Today it cannot be regarded
as anything more than an insistence on a variety of ways in which
the social purpose can be carried out. Functional groupings will
never be out of date and as for marriages they will happen among
those who belong to more or less the same stage of cultural
development. The present morbid condition of India broken into
castes and subcastes is opposed to the unity taught by the Gita,
which stands for an organic as against an atomistic conception
of society.

akartévam: non-doer. As the Supreme is unattached, He is said
to be a non-doer. Works do not affect His changeless being, though
He is the unseen background of all works.

Action without Attachment does not lead to Bondage

14. na mam karmani limpanti
name karmaphale sprha
iti mam yo ’bhiganati
karmabhir na sa badhyate

(14) Works do not defile Me; nor do I have yearning for
their fruit. He who knows Me thus is not bound by works

* ehavarnam idarh piirvarh visuam asid yudhisthira
harmakriyavisesena caturvarnyam pratisthitam

+ antyajo viprajatis ca eka eva sahodarak
chayoniprasiitas ca ekaSakhena jayate.

3 samkavat sarvavarnanarh duspariksyeti me matih
sarve sarvdsvapatyani janayanti sada navah
tasmat Silam pradhanestam vidur ye tattuadarsinah.162 The Bhagavadgita

15, evam jiatud kytam karma
piirvair api mumuksubhih
kuru karmat va tasmat tuam
pitrvaih purvataram kytam

(15) So knowing was work done also by the men of old who
sought liberation. Therefore do thou also work as the ancients
did in former times.

The ignorant perform action for self-purification (atma
Suddhyartham) and the wise perform action for the maintenance
of the world (lokasarigrahartham).

As the ancients carried out the work ordained by tradition,
Arjuna is called upon to do his duty as a warrior. Cp. “Lord of
the Universe, Supreme Spirit, Beneficent God, at Thy command
only, I shall carry on this pilgrimage of life, for the good of the
creatures and for Thy glory.”

Action and Inaction

16. him karma kim akarme’ti
kavayo ’py atra mohitah
tat te karma pravaksyami
‘yaj jhatvad moksyase 'Subhat
(16) What is action? What is inaction?—as to this even
the wise are bewildered. I will declare to thee what actiop
is, knowing which thou shalt be delivered from evil.

17. karmano hy api boddhavyam
boddhavyan ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyam

gahana karmano gatih
(x7) One has to understand what action is, and likewise one
has to understand what is wrong action and one has to
understand about inaction. Hard to understand is the way
of work.

What is the right course is not generally obvious. The ideas
of our time, the prescriptions of tradition, the voice of conscience
1 lokeéa caitanyamayadhideva mangalyavisno bhavad ajhayaiva
kitaya lokasya tava priyartham samsavayatram anuvartayisye.IV The Way of Knowledge 163

get mixed up and confuse us. In the midst of all this, the wise
man seeks a way out by a reference to immutable truths, with
the insight of the highest reason.

18 karmany akarma yah pasyed
akarmani ca karma yah
sa buddhiman manusyesu
sa yuktah kyisnakarmakyt
(18) He who in action sees inaction and action in inaction,
he is wise among men, he is a yogin and he has accomplished
all his work.

So long as we work in a detached spirit our mental balance is
not disturbed. We refrain from actions which are born of desire
and do our duties, with a soul linked with the Divine. So true
non-activity is to preserve inner composure and to be free from
attachment. Akarma means the absence of bondage resulting
from work because it is done without attachment. He who works
without attachment is not bound. We are acting even when we
sit quiet without any outward action. Cp. Astivakragita. The
turning away from action by fools due to perversity and ignorance
amounts to action. The action of the wise (that is their desireless
action) has the same fruit as that of renunciation.

S. explains that in atman there is no action; in the body
however there is no rest, even when there secms to be rest.

R. holds that akarma is atmajfiana. The wise man is he who
sees jfina in the true performance of karma. For him jfiana and
karma go together.

According to Madhva, akarma is the inactivity of the self and
the activity of Visnu. Therefore the wise man is he who sees the
activity of the Lord whether the individual is active or not.

19. yasya sarve samarambhah
Rimasamkalpavarjitah
jhanagnidagdhakarmanant
tam ahuh panditam budhah
{19) He whose undertakings are all free from the will of

murttir api midhasya pravytiiv upajayate
pravrtti api dhivasya nivyttiphalabhagini.
XVIII, 61.162 The Bhagavadgita

15, evam jnatva kytam karma
pirvair api mumuksubhih
kuru karmat ‘va tasmat tuam
pirvaih purvataram kytam
(15) So knowing was work done also by the men of old who
sought liberation. Therefore do thou also work as the ancients
did in former times.

The ignorant perform action for self-purification (ama
Suddhyartham) and the wise perform action for the maintenance
of the world (lokasamgrahartham).

As the ancients carried out the work ordained by tradition,
Arjuna is called upon to do his duty as a warrior. Cp. “Lord of
the Universe, Supreme Spirit, Beneficent God, at Thy command
only, I shall carry on this pilgrimage of life, for the good of the
creatures and for Thy glory.”*

Action and Inaction

16. kith karma kim akarme ti
kavayo ’py atra mohitah
tat te karma pravaksyami
yaj jRatva moksyase ’Subhat
(16) What is action? What is inaction?—as to this even
the wise are bewildered. I will declare to thee what actiop
is, knowing which thou shalt be delivered from evil.

17. karmano hy api boddhavyam
boddhavyam ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyam

gahand karmano gatih
{17) One has to understand what action is, and likewise one
has to understand what is wrong action and one has to
understand about inaction. Hard to understand is the way
of work.

What is the right course is not generally obvious. The ideas
of our time, the prescriptions of tradition, the voice of conscience
1 lokeSa caitanyamayadhideva mangalyavisno bhavad ajnayaiva
hilaya lokasya tava priyarthamn samsarayatram anuvartayssye.IV The Way of Knowledge 163

get mixed up and confuse us. In the midst of all this, the wise
man seeks a way out by a reference to immutable truths, with
the insight of the highest reason.

18 karmany akarma yah pasyed
akarmani ca karma yah
sa buddhiman manusyesu
sa yuktah krisnakarmakrt
(18) He who in action sees inaction and action in inaction,
he is wise among men, he is a yogin and he has accomplished
all his work.

So long as we work in a detached spirit our mental balance is
not disturbed. We refrain from actions which are born of desire
and do our duties, with a soul linked with the Divine. So true
non-activity is to preserve inner composure and to be free from
attachment. Akarma means the absence of bondage resulting
from work because it is done without attachment. He who works
without attachment is not bound. We are acting even when we
sit quiet without any outward action. Cp. Astdvakvagita. The
turning away from action by fools due to perversity and ignorance
amounts to action. The action of the wise (that is their desireless
action) has the same fruit as that of renunciation."

S. explains that in atman there is no action; in the body
however there is no rest, even when there seems to be rest.

R. holds that akarma is atmajfiana. The wise man is he who
sees jfiana in the true performance of karma. For him jfidna and
karma go together.

According to Madhva, akarma is the inactivity of the self and
the activity of Visnu. Therefore the wise man is he who sees the
activity of the Lord whether the individual is active or not.

19. yasya sarve samavambhah
hamasamkalpavarjitah
jnanadgnidagdhakarmanant
tam ahuh panditam budhah
(r9) He whose undertakings are all free from the will of
nivrttir api mighasya pravrttir upajayate
pravritir api dhirasya nivyttiphalabhagin},
XVII, 6r.164 The Bhagavadgita

desire, whose works are burned up in the fire of wisdom,
him the wise call a man of learning.

Such a worker has the universality of outlook born of wisdom
(jiima) and freedom from selfish desire. Though he works, he
really does nothing.

20. tyakivd karmaphalasangam
mityatypto nirasrayah
karmany abhipravrito ’pi
nai ’va kimcit karoti sah

(20) Having abandoned attachment to the fruit of works,
ever content, without any kind of dependence, he does
nothing though he is ever engaged in work.

Cp. Astivakragita, “He who is devoid of existence and non-
existence, who is wise, satisfied, free from desire, does nothing
even if he may be acting in the eyes of the world.”*

“He who, without attachment to them, surrenders to God all
religious practices ordained by the scriptures, ubtains the per-
fection of non-action; the promised fruit is only to attract us
to action,”2

21 nirdsiv yatacittatma
tyaktasarvaparigrahah
Séirivam kevalam karma
kurvan na pnoti kilbisam

(ax) Having no desires, with his heart and self under control,
giving up all possessions, performing action by the body
alone, he commits no wrong

Savivarn karma is work required for the maintenance of the
body according to §. and Madhusiidana. It is work done by the
body alone according to Vedanta Desika.

Virtue or vice does not belong to the outer deed. When a man
is rid of his passions and self-will, he becomes a mirror reflecting
the will of the Divine. The human soul becomes the pure channel
of Divine power.

XVIII, 19. See also 20-6.

2 vedokiam eva Rurvino nissango'rpitam isvare
nuisharmyasiddhin labhate rocandirtha phalasrutih.IV. The Way of Knowledge 165

22. yadrcchalabhasamtusto
dvandvatito vimatsarah
samah siddhav asiddhau ca
kytoa pi na nibadhyate

(22) He who is satisfied with whatever comes by chance,
who has passed beyond the dualities (of pleasure and pain),
who is free from jealousy, who remains the same in success
and failure, even when he acts, he is not bound.

Action by itself does not bind. If it does, then we are committed
to a gross dualism between God and the world and the world
becomes a cosmic blunder. The cosmos is a manifestation of the
Supreme and what binds is not the act but the selfish attitude to
action, born of ignorance which makes us imagine that we are
so many separate individuals with our special preferences and
aversions.

The teacher now proceeds to point out how the actor, the act
and the action are all different manifestations of the one Supreme
and action offered as a sacrifice to the Supreme does not bind.

Sacrifice and Its Symbolic Value

23. gatasangasya muktasya
jnanavasthitacetasah
yajhaya ’caratah karma
samagram praviliyate
(23) The work of a man whose attachments are sundered,

who is liberated, whose mind is firmly founded in wisdom,
who does work as a sacrifice, is dissolved entirely.

24 brahma 'rpanarh brahma havir
brahmagnau brahmana hutam
brahmai 'va tena gantavyam
brahmakarmasamadhina

(24) For him the act of offering is God, the oblation is God.
By God is it offered into the fire of God. God is that which is
to be attained by him who realizes God in his works.

The Vedic yajfia is here interpreted in a larger, spiritual way,166 The Bhagavadgita

Though the performer of yajfia does work, he is not bound by
it, for his earth life is brooded over by the sense of eternity.*

25. daivam eva 'pare yajiam
yoginah paryupasate
brahmagnav apare yajitam
yajftenat ’vo "pajuhvati

(25) Some yogins offer sacrifices to the gods while others
offer sacrifice by the sacrifice itself into the fire of the
Supreme.

S. interprets yajfia in the second half of the verse as atman.
“Others offer the self as self into the fire of Brahman.”’3

Those who conceive the Divine in various forms seek favours
from them by performing the consecrated rites of action, while
others offer all works to the Divine itself.

26. Srotradini ’ndriyany anye

samyamagnisu juhvati
Sabdadin visayén anya
indriyagnisu juhvati

(26) Some offer hearing and the other senses into the fires
of restraint; others offer sound and the other objects of
sense in the fires of sense.

By means of sacrifice interpreted here as means to mental
control and discipline, we strive to make knowledge penetrate

1 Cp. Sridhara: tad evar paramesvararadhanalaksapanh karma
jranahetutvena bandhakatvdbhavad akarmawa.
2 Cp. Mantiqu’t-Tair. E. T. by Fitzgerald.
“All you have been, and seen, and done and thought,
Not you but I, have seen and been and wrought.
Pilgrim, pilgrimage and Road,
‘Was but Myself toward Myself; and your
Arrival but Myself at my own door .. .
Come, you lost Atoms, to your centre draw...
Rays that have wandered into Darkness wide,
Return, and back into your Sun subside.”

Quoted from Ananda K.Coomaraswamy, Hinduism and Buddhism

(1943), Pp. 42. ee
3 Nilakantha says: ‘sopadhikarh jivam nirupadhikatmarapena
juhvati,- IV. The Way of Knowledge 167

our whole being.! Our whole being is surrendered and changed.
A right enjoyment of sense objects is compared to a sacrifice in
which the objects are the offering and senses the sacrificial fires.
Every form of self-control, where we surrender the egoistic en-
joyment for the higher delight, where we give up lower impulses,
is said to be a sacrifice.

27. sarvant ‘ndriyakarmant
pranakarmant ca pare
aimasamyamayogagnau
juhvatt jranadipite
(27) Some again offer all the works of their senses and the
works of the vital force into the fire of the yoga of self-
control, kindled by knowledge.

28. dravyayajids tapoyajna
yogayajhas tatha "pare
suadhyayajfanayajnas ca
yatayah samsitavratah

(28) Some likewise offer as sacrifice their material possessions,
or their austerities or their spiritual exercises while others
of subdued minds and severe vows offer their learning and
knowledge.

29. apdne juhvati pranam
prane panam tatha 'pare
pranapanagati ruddhva
pranaydmnapariyanah

(29) Others again who are devoted to breath control, having
restrained the paths of prana (the outgoing breath) and
apana (the incoming breath) pour as sacrifice prana into
apana and apana into prana.

1 Cp. Madbusiidana: dhavand dhyinam samadhw iti samyama-
Sabdenocyate: tathacaha bhagavar: pataiijalib, trayam ehatra sarya-
mah iti. tatra hytpundarikadaw manasascivakSlasthipanarh dharana;
evam ehasya dhytasya citlasya bhagavadaharavrthpravaho'ntard’-
nydkirapratyayavyavahito dhyanarn. sarvatha —vijafiyapratya-
yantaritah sajatiyapratyayapravahal samadhih.168 The Bhagavadgita

30. apare niyataharah
prandn pranesu juhvatt
sarve 'py ete yajnavido
yajfiaksapitakalmasah

(30) While others, restricting their food, pour as sacrifice
their life breaths into life breaths. All these are knowers of
sacrifice (know what sacrifice is) and by sacrifice have their
sins destroyed.

Restraint is the essence of all sacrifice and so all sacrifices may
be regarded as means to spiritual growth.

31. yajnasistamytabhiyo
yanti brahina sanatanam
na ’yarit luke ’sty ayajnasya
kuto 'nyah kurusattama
(3x) Those who eat the sacred food that remains after a
sacrifice attain to the eternal Absolute; this world is not
for him who offers no sacrifice, how then any other world,
O Best of the Kurus (Arjuna)?
The law of the world is sacrifice and he who violates it cannot
obtain mastery either here or beyond.

32. evan bahuvidha yajna
vitaia brahmano mukhe
karmajan viddhi tan sarvan

evam jnatva vimoksyase
(32) Thus many forms of sacrifice are spread out in the face
of Brahman (ie. set forth as the means of reaching the
Absolute) Know thou that all these are born of work, and
so knowing thou shalt be freed.

Wisdom and Work

33. Sreydn dravyamayad yajnaj
jnanayajiiah paramtapa
sarvam karma ’khilam partha
jhane parisamapyateIV. The Way of Knowledge 169

(33) Knowledge as a sacrifice is greater than any material
sacrifice, O scourge of the foe (Arjuna), for all works with-
out any exception culminate in wisdom.

The goal is the lifegiving wisdom, which gives us freedom of
action and liberation from the bondage of work.

34. tad viddhi pranipatena

pariprasnena sevaya

upadeksyanti te jianam
jfianinas tattvadarsinah

(34) Learn that by humble reverence, by inquiry and by
service. The men of wisdom who have seen the truth will
instruct thee in knowledge.

Wise men will teach us the truth if we approach them in a
spirit of service and reverent inquiry. Until we realize the God
within, we must act according to the advice of those who have
had the experience of God. If we accept what is said in the
Sastras or taught by the teacher in unthinking trust, that will
not do. Reason must be satisfied. ‘“He who has no personal know-
ledge but has only heard of many things cannot understand the
meaning of scriptures even as a spoon has no idea of the taste
of the soup.””! We must combine devotion to the teacher with the
most unrestricted right of free examination and inquiry. Blind
obedience to an external authority is repudiated. Today there
are several teachers who require of their followers unthinking
obedience to their dictates. They seem to believe that the death
of intellect is the condition of the life of spirit. Many credulous
and simple-minded people are drawn to them not so much by
their spiritual powers as by the publicity of their agents and the
human weakness for novelty, curiosity and excitement. This is
against the Hindu tradition which insists on jijiias4 or inquiry,
manana or reflection or pariprasna in the words of the Gita.

But’ mere intellectual apprehension will not do. Intellect can
only give fragmentary views, glimpses of the Beyond, but it does
not give the consciousness of the Beyond. We must open the

1 yasya nasti ny prajia |evalam tu bahusrutah
na sa janat: Sastravtham dare? si:parasamn iva.
M.B,, LL, 55, 1.170 The Bhagavadgita

whole of our inner being to establish personal contact. The
disciple has to tread the interior path. The ultimate authority
is the inner light which is not to be confused with the promptings
of desire. By the quality of service and self-effacement, we knock
down the obstructing prejudices and let the wisdom in us shine.
Truth achieved is different from truth imparted. Ultimately, what
is revealed in the scriptures (pranipata-gravana), what is thought
out by the mind (paripragna-manana) and what is realized by
the spirit through service and meditation (éeva-nididhyasana)
must agree." We must consort with the great minds of the past,
reason about them and intuitively apprehend what is of enduring
value in them.

This verse makes out that in spiritual life, faith comes first,
then knowledge, and then experience.

Those who have experienced the truth are expected to guide
us. The seers owe a duty to their less fortunate brethren and
guide them to the attainment of illumination which they have
reached.

In Praise of Wisdom

35. yaj jiatvd na punar moham
evam yasyasi pandava
yena bhittiny asesena
draksyasy atmany atho mayi

(35) When thou hast known it, thou shalt not fall again into
this confusion, O Pandava (Arjuna), for by this thou shalt
see all existences without exception in the Self, then in Me.

When the sense of difference is destroyed actions do not bind,
since ignorance is the source of bondage and the self, having
attained wisdom, is free from it.

* Cp, Plato: “A man should persevere till he has achieved one of
two things: either he should discover the truth about them for
himself or learn it from some one else; or if this is impossible he
should take the best and most irrefragable of human theories and
make it the raft on which he sails through life.” Phaedo, 85.
Cp. Plotinus: “Out of discussion we call to vision, to those desiring
to see we point the path, our teaching is a guiding in the way,
the seeing must be the very act of him who has made the choice,”
Enneads, V1, 9, 4.IV. The Way of Knowledge 71
36 api ced asi papebhyah
sarvebhyah papakrttamah
sarvam jnanaplavenai 'va
urjinam samtarisyasi
(36) Even if thou shouldst be the most sinful of all sinners,
thou shalt cross over all evil by the boat of wisdom alone.

37. yathai ’dhamsi samiddho ‘gnir
bhasmasat kurute ’rjuna
jhanagnih sarvakarmant
bhasmasat kurute tatha
(37) As the fire which is kindled turns its fuel to ashes,
O Arjuna, even so does the fire of wisdom turn to ashes all
work,

38 na hi jianena sadrsam
pavitram tha vidyate
tat svayam yogasamsiddhah
kalena 'tmani vindati
(38) There is nothing on earth equal in purity to wisdom.
He who becomes perfected by yoga finds this of himself,
in his self in course of time.

Self-control discovers it to man at last.

Faith is Necessary for Wisdom

39 Sraddhavaml labhate jhanam
latparah samyatendriyah
jitanam labdhva param santim
acirena 'dhigacchati
\39) He who has faith, who is absorbed in it (i.e. wisdom) and
who has subdued his senses gains wisdom and having gained
wisdom he attains quickly the supreme peace.

Svaddha; faith. Faith is necessary for gaining wisdom. Faith
is not blind belief. It is the aspiration of the soul to gain wisdom.
It is the reflection in the empirical self of the wisdom that dwells172 The Bhagavadgita

in the deepest levels of our being. It taith is constant, it takes us
to the realization of wisdom. Jiiana as wisdom is free from doubts
while intellectual knowledge where we depend on sense data and
logical inference, doubt and scepticism have their place. Wisdom
is not acquired by these means. We have to live it inwardly and
grow into its reality. The way to it is through faith and self-
control.

pararh Santim: the supreme peace. Nilakantha suggests that
he attains the supreme state of bliss, after the karma which has
commenced to operate completes its course.

40. ajhas ca ’Sraddadhanas ca
samSaydima vinasyati
na@’yam loko ’sti na paro
na sukham samsayatmanah
(40) But the man who is ignorant, who has no faith, who is
of a doubting nature, perishes. For the doubting soul, there
is neither this world nor the world beyond nor any happiness.
We must have a positive basis for life, an unwavering taith
which stands the test of life.

41. yogasannyastakarmanam
jhanasamchinnasamsayam
atmavantam na karmani
nibadhnanti dhanamjaya
(42) Works do not bind him who has renounced all works by
yoga, who has destroyed all doubt by wisdom and who ever
possesses his soul, O winner of wealth (Arjuna).

The mutual relationship of true work, wisdom and self-discipline
is here brought out.

yogasamnyastakarmanam: who has renounced all works by
yoga. This may refer to those who develop even-mindedness with
worship of God as its characteristic, and so dedicate all works
to God or to those who have insight into the highest reality and
so are detached from works.? Madhusiidana.

1 videhakaivalyam .. . pravabdhakarmasamap'au salyam.

2 yogena bhagavadarddhanalaksanasamatvabuddhivixpena saranya-
stani bhagavati samarpitani harmani yena yad va paramérthadarsa-
nalaksanena yogena sarnyastani tyakténi harmani yena, tar yogasarn-
nyastakarmanam.IV. The Way of Knowledge 173

Gimavantam: who possesses his self. While he does work for
others, he remains his own self. In the eager pursuit of the good
of others, he does not lose his hold on the self.

42 tasmad ajnanasambhitam
hyistham jiianasind ’tmanah
chittvat nant samsayani yogam
Gtistho ’ttistha bhavata

(42) Therefore having cut asunder with the sword of wisdom
this doubt in thy heart that is born of ignorance, resort to
yoga and stand up, O Bharata (Arjuna).

Arjuna is here called upon to pertorm action with the help of
knowledge and concentration. The doubt in his heart whether
it is better to fight or abstain is the product of ignorance. It will
be destroyed by wisdom. Then he will know what is right for
him to do.

iti. . . jiid@nayogo nama caturtho 'dhyayah

This is the fourth chapter entitled The Yoga of Divine
Knowledge

Sometimes the chapter is entitled Jfiana Karmasarhnydsayoga,
the yoga of knowledge and (true) renunciation of action.. CHAPTER V
True Renunciation

Samkhya and Yoga lead to the same goal

arjuna uvaca
I samnydasam karmanam krsna
punar yogam ca Samsasi
yac chreya etayor eham
tan me brithi suniscitam

Arjuna said:
(t) Thou praisest, O Krsna, the renunciation of works and

again their unselfish performance. Tell me for certain which
one is the better of these two.

S. argues that the question is with reference to the unen-
lightened, for the man who has realized the Self has no longer
any object to gain since he has achieved all. In III, 17, it is said
that he has no more duties to perform. In such passages as III, 4
and IV, 6, the method of work is enjoined as an accessory to
the acquisition of the knowledge of the Self, while in VI, 3, it
is said that the man who has obtained right knowledge has no
longer anything to do with work. Further, in IV, 21, all action
is denied to him except that which is required for bodily main-
tenance. The man who knows the true nature of the Self is directed
in V, 8, always to meditate with a concentrated mind on the
idea that it is not “1” that do it. It is not possible to imagine
even in a dream that the man who knows the Self can have any-
thing to do with work so opposed to right knowledge and entirely
based on illusory knowledge. So §. contends that Arjuna’s
question relates only to those who have not known the Self.
For the ignorant, work is better than renunciation.

The intention of the Gitd right through seems to be that the
work to be abandoned is selfish work which binds us to the chain

1 Gtmatattvavidah samyagdarsanavivuddho mithyajninahetukah
harmasogah svapnep! na sambhavayitum sakyateV. True Renunciation 175

of karma and not all activity. We cannot be saved by works
alone, but works are not opposed to saving wisdom.

Sribhagavén uvéca
2. samnydsah karmayogas ca
nihSreyasakarav ubhau
tayos tu karmasamnyasat
Rarmayogo visisyate
The Blessed Lord said:
{2) The renunciation of works and their unselfish per-
formance both lead to the soul’s salvation. But of the two,
the unselfish performance of works is better than their
renunciation.'

The Sarhkhya method involves the renunciation of works and
the Yoga insists on their performance in the right spirit. They
are at bottom the same but the Yoga way comes more naturally
to us. The two ways are not inconsistent. In Sarhkhya, jfidina
or insight is emphasized. In Yoga, volitional effort is stressed.
In one, we know the Self by thinking away the alien elements;
in the other, we will them away.

3. jieyah sa nityasamnyasi
yo na dvesti na kanksati
nirdvandvo hi mahabaho
sukham bandhat pramucyate
(3) He who neither loathes nor desires should be known as
one who has ever the spirit of renunciation; for free from
dualities he is released easily, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna),
from bondage.
nityasaninyasi; one who has ever the spirit of renunciation. The
true worker (karmayogin) is also the true renouncer (nitya
sarhnydsin), for he does his work in a detached spirit.?

4. samkhyayogau prihag balah
pravadanti na panditah
ekam apy asthitah samyag
ubhayor vindate phalam
* See III, 8.
* sa karmani pravrttop: nityarm sarmyasit: yheyah. Madhusidana.176 The Bhagavadgita —

(4) The ignorant speak of renunciation (Sarnkhya) and
practice of works (Yoga) as different, not the wise. He whe
applies himself well to one, gets the fruit of both.

In this chapter, Yoga means karmayoga and Sarhkhya means

the intellectual way with renunciati: —

5. yat simkhyaih prapyate sihanam
tad yogair api ganvyate
cham simkhyam ca yogam ca
yah paSsyati sa pasyatr

(5) The status which is obtained by men of renunciation is
reached by men of action also. He who sees that the ways of
renunciation and of action are one, he sees (truly).

5(b) appears elsewhere in the M.B., Sanhparva, 305, 19;
316, 4.1 The true renouncer is not he who remains completely
inactive but he whose work is done in a spirit of detachment.
Renunciation is a mental attitude, the casting-off of desire in
work; true work is work with all desire renounced. There is not
any opposition between the two. Cp. ‘“When actions are performed
by the wise man or the fool, the body (that is the external act)
is the same but the inward understanding is different.2 M.B. says
that the Bhagavata religion is equal in merit to the Sarhkhya
religion.”’3

6. samnydsas tu mahabaho
duhkham aptum ayogatah
yogayukto munir brahma
nacirena ‘dhigacchati

(6) But renunciation, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), is difficult
to attain without yoga; the sage who is earnest in yoga
(the way of works) attains soon to the Absolute.

1 Cp. yad eva yogah pasyanti tat samkhyaw apr dysyate
eham samkhyam ca yogark ca yah pasyatt sa tattuavit,

2 pragiasya miirkhasya ca Réryayoge
samatuam abhyeti tanur na buddhik.—Avimara, V, 5.

3 sdrakhyayogena tulyo ht dharma ekantasevitah. Santyparva, 348, 7%.V. True Renunciation 177

7. yogayukto visuddhatma

vizitatma jitendriyah

sarvabhiitatmabhitatma
kurvann api na lipyate

(7) He who is trained in the way of works, and is pure in
soul, who is master of his self and who has conquered the
senses, whose soul becomes the self of all beings, he is not
tainted by works, though he works.

He renounces all actions inwardly, not outwardly. Even S.
admits that such action is quite consistent with the knowledge of
Self. Even if he acts for the sake of world-solidarity, he is not
bound by actions."

8. nai ’va kivtcit kavomi ’t
yukto manyeta tattvavit
pasyan Srnvan sprsah jighrann
aSnan gacchan svapah Svasan

(8) The man who is united with the Divine and knows the
truth thinks ‘‘I do nothing at all’ for in seeing, hearing,
touching, smelling, tasting, walking, sleeping, breathing;

9. pralapan visyjan grhnann
unmisan nimisann api
indriyani ’ndriyarthesu
vartanta iti dha@rayan
(9) In speaking, emitting, grasping, opening and closing the
eyes he holds that only the senses are occupied with the
objects of the senses.
We are called upon to realize the self in us which is pure and
free and distinct from the factors, of prakrti-or objective universe,
“The Constituents OT the égo are impermanent, a flux which changes
from moment to moment, There is no changeless centre or
immortal iacleus in these pretenders to selfhood.

‘sah . . . lokasamgrahdya karma kurvann api na lipyate, na
harmabhir ‘badhyate.178 The Bhagavadgita

10. brahmany adhaya karmani
sangam tyakiva kavoti yah
lipyate na sa papena
padmapatiram iva ’mbhasa

(10) He who works, having given up attachment, resigning
his actions to God, is not touched by sin, even as a lotus
leaf (is untouched) by water.

The Gita requires us, not to renounce works but to do them,
offering them to the Supreme in which alone is immortality. When
‘we renounce our attachment to the finite ego and its likes and
dislikes and place our actions in the Eternal, we acquire the true
renunciation which is consistent with free activity in the world.
Such a renouncer acts not for his fleeting finite self but for the
Self which is in us all.

brahmany adhaya. karmayi..R-makes Brahman, equivalent to

i

11. kayena manasa buddhya
hevalair indriyair apt
yoginah karma kurvanti

Sangam tyaktoa ’tmasuddhaye

(tx) The yogins (men of action). perform. works merely with ..
the body, mind, understanding or merely with the senses,
abandoning attachment, for the purification of their souls.

12. yuktah karmaphalam tyaktva
Sintim apnoti naisthikim
ayuktah kamakarena
phale sakto nibadhyate

(12) The soul earnest (or devoted) attains to peace well-
founded, by abandoning attachment to the fruits of works,
but he whose soul is not in union with the Divine is impelled
by desire, and is attached to the fruit (of action) and is
(therefore) bound.
= Cp. Emerson:

“Teach me your mood, O patient stars;

Who climb each night the ancient sky,

Leaving on space no shade, no scars,

No trace of age, no fear to die.”V. True Renunciation 179

yuktah, or disciplined in action.

$antim. When the peace of God descends on us, Divine know-
ledge floods our being with a light which illumines and trans-
forms, making clear all that was before dark and obscure.

The Enlightened Self

13. sarvakarmani manasa
samnyasya ’ste sukham vast
navadvare pure dehi
nai ’va kurvan na kavayan

(13) The embodied (soul), who has controlled his nature
having renounced all actions by the mind (inwardly) dwells
at ease in the city of nine gates, neither working nor causing
work to be done.

Cp. Katha Up., V, t.

The nine gates are the two eyes, the two ears, the two nostrils,
and the mouth and the two organs of excretion and generation.
See SvetéSvatara Up., III, 18.

14. na kariytvam na karmani
lokasya srjati prabhuh

na karmaphalasamyogam
svabhavas tu pravartate

(14) The Sovereign Self does not create for the people
agency, nor does He act. Nor does He connect works with
their fruits. It is nature that works out (these).

Prabhuk is the Sovereign Self of the knower, the Real Self which
is one with all that is.

15. na ‘daite kasyacit papam
nq cai ’va sukytam vibhuh
ajhanend 'vrtamh jidnar
tena muhyanti jantavah
(15) The All-pervading Spirit does not take on the sin or
the merit of any. Wisdom is enveloped by ignorance;
thereby creatures are bewildered180 The Bhagavadgita

vibhuh: all-pervading. Each soul is not a separate monad,
eternal and changeless. Vibhuh refers either to the Self of the
jfiinin or the Supreme Self, which are identical in Advaita
Vedanta.

ajfanena: by ignorance. It is the ignorance which makes us
believe in the ultimateness of the multiplicity.

jitanam: wisdom. It is the wisdom which is the one basis of
all distinctions."

16. jidnena tu tad ajnanam
yesam nasitam atmanah
tesa adityavaj jana
prakasayati tat param
(16) But for those in whom ignorance is destroyed by wisdom,
for them wisdom lights up the Supreme Self like the sun

tatparam: paramartha tattvam. ultimate reality. $
The Self above the ego is not touched by sin or merit, by joy
or sorrow. It is the witness of all.

17 tadbuddhayas tadatmanas

tannisthas tatparayanah
gacchanty apunarauritim

jndnanirdhitakalmasah

(7) Thinking of That, directing their whole conscious
being to That, making That their whole aim, with That as
the sole object of their devotion, they reach a state from
which there is no return, their sins washed away by wisdom.

The false ego determined by works disappears and the jiva
realizes its identity with the Supreme Self and works from that
centre.

18 vidydvinayasampanne
braihmane gavi hastint
Suni cat ’va Svapake ca
panditah samadarsinah
* ajhanendvaranaviksepasaktimata mayakhyend’ aytena tamasa jfia-
navn jivesvarajagadbhedabhramadhisthanabhitam nityam svaprakasam
saccidandndarupam advitiyan paramdrthasatyam. MadhusidanaV. True Renunciation 181

(18) Sages see with an equal eye, a learned and humble
Brahmin, a cow, an elephant or even a dog or an outcaste.

udyavinayasampanne: great learning brings great humility. As
our knowledge increases we become increasingly aware of the
encircling darkness. It is when we light the candle that we see
how dark it is. What we know is practically nothing compared
to what we do not know." A little knowledge leads to dogmatism,
a little more to questioning and a little more takes us to prayer.
Besides, humility comes from the knowledge that we are sus-
tained in existence by the love of God. The greatest thinkers of
all ages were deeply religious men.

vinaya: humility or rather modesty which is the result of
cultivation or discipline. The first division of the Buddhist
Tipitaka is called vinaya or discipline. vinaya is the opposite of
pride or insolence. The recognition of dependence on non-human
factors produces cosmic piety. The truly learned are humble.

samadarsinah: see with an equal eye. The Eternal is the same
in all, in animals, as in men, in learned Brahmins as in despised
outcasts. The light of Brahman dwells in all bodies and is not
affected by the differences in the bodies it illumines.

The characteristics of the Supreme, being, consciousness and
bliss, are present in all existences and the differences relate to
their names and forms, that is, their embodiments.2 When we
look at things from the standpoint of the Ultimate Reality present
in all, we “see with an equal eye.”3 The fundamental dualism
is that of spirit and nature and not of soul and body. It is the
distinction between the subject and the object. Nature is the
world of objectivization, of alienation, of determinability. There
we have, the distinction of minerals, plants and animals and
men, but they all have an inner non-objective existence. The

‘ The familiar sentence of the great Newton illustrates this: “I
do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem
to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting
myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell
than ordinary, while the great ocean of truth lay undiscovered
before me.” I might transcribe a sentence of Henry Adams. “After
all, man knows mighty little, and may some day learn enough of
his own ignorance to fall down and pray.”

+ asti bhati priyam rixparh nama cety amsapancaham
Gdyarh trayarh brahmariipam yagadripam tato dvayam.
3 caracaram jagad brakmadystyaiva pasyanti, Nilakantha.182 The Bhagavadgita

subject, Reality, dwells in all of them. This affirmation of basic
identity is not inconsistent with the empirical variety. Even S$.
admits that the one eternal reality is revealing itself in higher
and higher forms through successive stages of manifestation." The
empirical variety should not hide from us the metaphysical reality
which all beings have in common. This view makes us look upon
our fellow beings with kindliness and compassion. The wise see
the one God in all beings and develop the quality of equalminded
ness which is characteristic of the Divine.

1g. thai ’va tair jitah sargo
yesim samye sthitam manah
nirdosam hi samam brahma

tasmad brahmani te sthitah
(z9) Even here (on earth) the created (world) is overcome
by those whose mind is established in equality. God is
flawless and the same in all. Therefore are these (persons)
established in God.

See Chandogya Up., II, 23. 1.
The state of liberation is one which we can attain here on earth.

20. na prahrsyet priyam prapya
no 'dvijet prapya ca priyam
sthirabuddhir asammiidho
brahmavid brahmani sthitah

(20) One should not rejoice on obtaining what is pleasant
nor sorrow on obtaining what is unpleasant. He who is
(thus) firm of understanding and unbewildered, (such a)
knower of God is established in God.

brahmani sthitah: established in God. He gets at It, reaches It,
enters into It and is fairly established in It.

21. bahyasparsesv asaktatma
vindaty dtmani yat sukham
sa brahmayogayuktatma
sukham aksayam asnute
t ehasydpi hittasthasya cittataratamyat, jaanaisvaryanam abhivyahih
parena parena bhityasi bhavati. S-B.1., 3, 30.V True Renunciation 183

(2x) When the soul is no longer attached to external con-
tacts (objects) one finds the happiness that is in the Self.
Such a one who is self-controlled in Yoga on God (Brahma)
enjoys undying bliss.

He, who has freed himself from the phantoms of the senses
and lives in the Eternal, enjoys the bliss divine.t

22. ye hi samsparsaja bhoga
duhkhayonaya eva te
Gdyantavantah kaunteya
na tesu ramate budhah
(22) Whatever pleasures are born of contacts (with objects)
are only sources of sorrow, they havea beginning and an end,
O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), no wise man delights in them.

See II, 14n.?

23 Saknoti *hai ’va yah sodhum
prak Sarivavimoksanat

kimakrodhodbhavarn vegam

sa yuktah sa sukhi narah

(23) He who is able to resist the rush of desire and anger,
even here before he gives up his body, he is a yogin, he is
the happy man.

The non-attachment from which inner peace, freedom and joy
arise is capable of realization even here on earth, even when we
lead embodied lives. In the midst of human life, peace within can
be attained.

Peace from Within
24. yo ntahsukho ’ntardramas
tatha 'ntarjyotir eva yah
sa yogi brahmanirvanam
brahmabhiito 'dhigacchati

* Cp. Brother Lawrence: “I know, that, for the right practice of
it, the heart must be empty of all else; because God wills to possess
the heart alone; and as He cannot possess it alone unless it is empty
of all else, so He cannot work in it what He would unless it be left
vacant for Him.” The Practice of the Presence of God.

2 Cp. Bhagavata

sukhasyanantaram dukkham duhkhasyanantaram sukham
cakvavat parivarttete sukhaduhkhe nirantaram.184 The Bhagavadgita

(24) He who finds his happiness within, his joy within and
likewise his light only within, that yogin becomes divine
and attains to the beatitude of God (brahmanirvana).

The yogin becomes unified in consciousness with the Eternal
in him. The next verse indicates that this nirvana is not mere
annihilation. It is a positive state full of knowledge and self-
possession.

25. labhante brahmanirvanam
rsayah ksinakalmasah
chinnadvaidha yatatmanah
sarvabhiitahite ratah

(25) The holy men whose sins are destroyed, whose doubts
(dualities) are cut asunder, whose minds are disciplined and

who rejoice in (doingy good to all creatures, attain to the
ee of God:

sarvabhitahite ratzh: the soul which has acquired wisdom and
peace is also the soul of love and compassion. He who sees all
existence in the Supreme, sees the Divine even in the fallen and
the criminal, and goes out to them in deep love and sympathy.

To do good to others is not to give them physical comforts or
raise their standard of living. It is to help others to find their
true nature, to attain true happiness. The contemplation of the
Eternal Reality in whom we all dwell gives warmth and support
to the sense of the service of fellow-creatures. All work is for the
sake of the Supreme. jagad hitdya kysndya. To overcome the world
is not to become other-worldly. It is not to evade the social
responsibilities.

The two sides of religion, the personal and the social, are
emphasized by the Gita. Personally, we should discover the Divine
in us and let it penetrate the human; socially, society must be
subdued to the image of the Divine. The individual should grow
in his freedom and uniqueness and he should recognize the dignity
of every man, even the most insignificant. Man has not only to
ascend to the world of spirit but also ‘to descend to the world
of creatures.

 

2 Cp. dystint jlanamayin krtua,
pasyed brahmamayam iagat.V True Renunciation 185

26. kamakrodhaviyuktanary
yatinam yatacetasim
abhito brahmanirvanam
vartate viditatmanam

(26) To those austere souls (yatis) who are delivered from
desire and anger and who have subdued their minds and
have knowledge of the Self, near to them lies the beatitude

of God

They live in the consciousness of Spirit. The possibility of
blessed existence in this world is indicated here.

27 ©sparsan kytod bahir bahyams
caksus cai ’vad ’ntare bhruvoh
pranapanau samau kriva
nasabhyantaracavinau

28. yatendriyamanobuddhir
munir moksaparayanah
vigatecchabhayakrodho
yah sadé mukta eva sak

(27) and (28). Shutting out all external objects, fixing the
vision between the eyebrows, making even the inward and
the outward breaths moving within the nostrils, the sage
who has controlled the senses, mind and understanding,
who is intent on liberation, who has cast away desire, fear
and anger, he is ever freed.

Cp. “When one fixes the thought on the midpoint between the
two eyes the Light streams of its own accord.” It is symbolic
of union with buddhi, that gives spiritual knowledge.

29. bhoktarart yajnatapasam
sarvalokamahesvaram
suhydam sarvabhiitanam
jiatoa mam Santim rechati
(29) And having known Me as the Enjoyer of sacrifices and
« The Secret of the Golden Flower. E.T. by Wilhelm.186 The Bhagavadgita

austerities, the Great Lord of all the worlds, the Friend of all
beings, he (the sage) attains peace.

The transcendent God becomes the lord of all creation, the
friend of all creatures, who does good to them without expecting
any return.t God is not merely the distant world-ruler but an
intimate friend and helper, ever ready to assist us in overcoming
evil, if only we trust Him. The Bhagavata says: “Of whom I am
the beloved, the self, the son, the friend, the teacher, the relative
and the desired deity.”

iti. . . karmasarnnyasayogo nama paicamo ‘dhyayah

This is the fifth chapter entitled The Yoga of Renunciation
of Action.

Sarvapraninam pratyupakdranirapeksataya upakariyam §, See
also S.B.G., IX, 18.
2 yesdm aham priya, Gtma, sutas ca
sakha, guruh, suhpdo, daivam istam.
III, 25, 38.CHAPTER VI
The True Yoga

Renunciation and Action are One

Sribhagavan uvaca
I. andsritah karmaphalam
karyam karma karoti yah
Sa samnyasi ca yogica |
na nivagnir na ca ’kriyah
The Blessed Lord said:
(x) He who does the work which he ought to do without
Seeking its fruit he is the sarhnyasin, he is the yogin, not he
who does not light the sacred fire, and perfo

The teacher emphasizes that sarinydsa or renunciation has little
to do with outward works. It is an inward attitude. To become
a sarinyasin it is not necessary to give up the sacrificial fire and
the daily ritual. To abstain from these without the spirit of
re iation is fut:

S., however, by the use of the word “kevalam,” makes out
that “he who does not light the sacred fire and performs no rites
is not the only sariny4sin.” This does not seem to be quite fair
to the text.

2. yam saninyasam iti prahur
yogam tam viddhi pandava
na hy asamnyastasamkalpo
yogi bhavati kascana
(2) What they call renunciation, that know to be disciplined
activity, O Pandava (Arjuna), for no one becomes a yogin
who has not renounced his (selfish) purpose.
sammyasa; renunciation. It consists in the accomplishment of
the necessary action without an inward striving for reward. This
is true yoga, firm control over oneself, complete self-possession.
This verse says that disciplined activity (yoga) is just as good
as renunciation (sarnny4sa).188 The Bhagavadgita
The Pathway and the Goal

3. drurukgor muner yogam
karma karanam ucyate

yogaridhasya tasyai va
Samah kavanam ucyate

(3) Work is said to be the means of the sage who wishes to
attain to yoga; when he has attained to yoga, serenity is
said to be the means.

When we are aspirants for liberation (s@dhandvasthé), work
done in the right spirit with inner renunciation helps us. When
once we achieve self-possession (siddhdvasthd) we act, not for
gaining any end but out of our anchorage in God-consciousness.
Through work we struggle to obtain self-control; when self-con-
trol is attained-we obtain peace. It does not follow that we then
abandon all action. For in VI, 1, it is stated that the true yogin
is one who performs work and not one who renounces it. Sama
does ean the cessation of karma. It cannot be the cause
(kdrana) Of wisdenr;-for the pei perfected sage has already attained
wisdom. V, 12 says that the yogin attains <amplete tranquillity
by abandoning the fruit of action. He performs actions wit. a
perfect equanimity. He overflows with a spontaneous vitality.and
works with a generosity which arises from his own n inexhaustible
Strength.

4. yada hi ne 'ndriyarthesu
na karmasv anusajjate
sarvasamkalpasaninyast
yogariidhas tado ’cyate

(4) When one does not get attached to the objects of sense
or to works, and has renounced all purposes, then, he is said
to have attained to yoga

sarvasamkalpasarinyasi; one who has renounced all purposes.
We must give up our likes and dislikes, forget ourselves, leave
ourselves out. By the abandonment of all purposes, by the morti-
fication of the ego, by the total surrender to the will of the
Supreme, the aspirant develops a condition of mind approxi-VI The True Yoga 189

mating to the Eternal. He partakes in some measure the undif-
ferentiated timeless consciousness of that which he desires to
apprehend.

The freed soul works without desire and attachment, without
the egoistic will of which desires are born. Manu says that all
desires are born of sarnkalpa,t M.B. says: “O desire, I know thy
root. Thou art born of sarhkalpa or thought. I shall not think
of thee and thou shalt cease to exist.”

5. uddhared atmanda ’tmanan
na ’tménam avasadayet
dimai ’va hy dimano bandhur
Gimai va ripur dtmanah

(5) Let a man lift himself by himself; let him not degrade
himself; for the Self alone is the friend of the self and the
Self alone is the enemy of the self.

Cp. Dhammapada: “The Self is the lord of the self;’’ “the Self
is the goal of the self.”4 .

The Supreme is within us. It is the consciousness underlying
the ordinary individualized consciousness of every-day life but
incommensurable with it. The two are different in kind, though
the Supreme is realizable by one who is prepared to lose his life
in order to save it. For the most part we are unaware of the Self
in us because our attention is engaged by objects which we like
or dislike. We must get away from them, to become aware of the
Divine in us. If we do not realize the pointlessness, the irrelevance
and the squalor of our ordinary life, the true Self becomes the
enemy of our ordinary life. The Universal Self and the personal
self are not antagonistic to each other. The Universal Self
can be the friend or the foe of the personal self. If we subdue
our petty cravings and desires, if we do not exert our selfish will,
we become the channel of the Universal Self. If our impulses are
‘under control, and if our personal self offers itself to the Universal

* sarnkalpamiilah Ramo vai yajaah sankalpasambhavah. I, 3.
3 kama, janami te milam, samkalpat tuam hi jayase
na tua samkalpayisyami tena me na bhavisyasi.
‘antiparva, 77, 25.
3 atta hi attano natho. 160. 4 alta hi attano gati, 380.190 The Bhagavadgita

Self, then the latter becomes our guide and teacher." Every one
of us has the freedom to rise or fall and our future is in our own
hands.

6. bandhur atma 'tmanas tasya
yena ’tmai ’va ’tmana jitah
andimanas tu satrutve
varteta ’tmai ‘va Satruvat

(6) For him who has conquered his (lower) self by the
(higher) Self his Self is a friend but for him who has not
possessed his (higher) Self, his very Self will act in enmity,
like an enemy.

We are called upon to master the lower self by the higher. The
determinism of nature is here qualified by the power to control
nature. The lower self is not to be destroyed. It can be used as
a helper, if it is held in check.

7. jitatmanah prasantasya
paramatma samalitah
Sitosnasukhaduhkhesu
tatha mandpamanayoh

(7) When one has conquered one’s self (lower) and has
attained to the calm of self-mastery, his Supreme Self abides
ever concentrate, he is at peace in cold and heat, in pleasure
and pain, in honour and dishonour.

* Boehme says: “Nothing truly but thine own willing, hearing
and seeing do keep thee back from it, and do hinder thee from coming
to this supersensual state. And it is because thou strivest so against
that, out of which thou thyself art descended and derived, that thou
thus breakest thyself off, with thine own willing, from God's willing,
and with thy own seeing from God's seeing.” St. John of the Cross
says: “The more the soul cleaves to created things relying on its
own strength, by habit and inclination, the less is it disposed for
this union, because it does not completely resign itself into the hands
of God, that He may transform it supernaturally.”
Jami wrote in his Lawa’ih:

Make my heart pure, my soul from error free,

Make tears and sighs my daily lot to be,

And lead me on Thy road away from self,

That lost to self I may approach to Thee.

Whinfield’s E. T.VI The True Yoga IQX

This is the state of blessedness of the person who has established
himself in unity with the Universal Self. He is a jit@#man whose
calm and serenity are not disturbed by the pains of the opposites.

paramatma samahitah: S. says that the Supreme Self regards
him as His very self.t The self in the body is generally absorbed
by the world of dualities, cold and heat, pain and pleasure but
when it controls the senses and masters the world, the self
becomes free. The Supreme Self is not different from the self in
the body. When the self is bound by the modes of prakrti or
nature, it is called ksetrajfia; when it is freed from them, the
same self is called the Supreme Self.» This is certainly the position
of Advaita (non-dual) Vedanta.

Those who are opposed to this view break up paramatma into
two words, param and 4tma, and look upon the word param as
an adverb qualifying the verb samahitah.

R. takes param as an adverb and holds that the self is sublimely
realized.

Sridhara says that such a person becomes concentrated in his
self.3 Anandagiri holds that the self of such a person becomes
completely concentrated.+

sama-Ahita: firmly directed to equality. This is not, however,
the usual explanation.

 

8. jilanavijhanatyptatma
Rittastho vijitendriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogi
samalostasmakaficanah
(8) The ascetic (yogi) whose soul is satisfied with wisdom
and knowledge, who is unchanging and master of his senses,
to whom a clod, a stone and a piece of gold are the same, is
said to be controlled (in yoga).
jana vijhana: see III, 4x note.
haftastha: literally, set on a high place, immovable, changeless,
firm, steady, tranquil.
' saksat dimabhavena vartate.
2 Cp. M.B. dtma hsetrajiia ity uktah samyuktah prakytair gunaib
tair eva tu vinirmuktah payamatmety udahriah.
Santiparva, 187, 24.
3 samahitah atmanisthah bhavatt.
4 sam-d-hita cp. samadhi: jitatmanah nirvikavacittasya Gtma, cittam
param utharsena samahitah samadhi praptah bhavatt.192 The Bhagavadgita

The yogin is said to be yukta or in yoga when he is concen-
trating on the Supreme above the changes of the world. Such
a yogin is satisfied with the knowledge and experience of the
Reality behind the appearances. He is unperturbed by things
and happenings of the world and is therefore said to be equal-
minded to the events of this changing world.

9. suhynmitraryudasina-
madhyasthadvesyabandhusu
Sddhusv api ca papesu
samabuddhir visisyate

(9) He who is equal-minded among friends, companions and
foes, among those who are neutral and impartial, among
those who are hateful and related, among saints and sinners,
he excels

Another reading for visisyate is vimucyate. S.B.G.
How is one to attain to this yoga?

Eternal Vigilance over Body and Mind is Essential

10. yogi yuiijita satatam
Gtmainam rahasi sthitah
ehaki yatacittatma
nirasiv aparigrahah

(10) Let the yogin try constantly to concentrate his mind
(on the Supreme Self) remaining in solitude and alone, self-
controlled, free from desires and (longing for) possessions

Here the teacher develops the technique of mental discipline
on the lines of Patafijali’s Yoga Siva. Its main purpose is to raise
our consciousness from its ordinary waking condition to higher
levels until it attains union with the Supreme. The human mind
is ordinarily turned outwards. Absorption in the mechanical and
material sides of life leads to a disbalanced condition of con-
sciousness. Yoga attempts to explore the inner world of con-
sciousness and helps to integrate the conscious and the sub-
conscious.

We must divest our minds of all sensual desires, abstract ourVI. The True Yoga 193

attention from all external objects and absorb it in the object
of meditation.' See B.G., XVIII, 72, where the teacher asks
Arjuna whether he heard his teaching with his mind fixed to one
point, ckagrena cetasa. As the aim is the attainment of purity
of vision, it exacts of the mind fineness and steadiness. Our present
dimensions are not the ultimate limits of our being. By sum-
moning all the energies of the mind and fixing them on one point,
we raise the level of reference from the empirical to the real, from
observation to vision and let the spirit take possession of our
whole being. In the Book of Proverbs, it is said that “the spirit
of man is the candle of the Lord.” There is something in the
inmost being of man which can be struck into flame by God.

satatam: constantly. The practice must be constant. It is no
use taking to meditation by fits and starts. A continuous creative
effort is necessary for developing the higher, the intenser form
of consciousness.

rahasi: in solitude. The aspirant must select a quiet place with
soothing natural surroundings such as the banks of rivers or tops
of hills which lift our hearts and exalt our minds. In a world
which is daily growing noisier, the duty of the civilized man is
to have moments of thoughtful stillness. Cp. “Thou, when thou
prayest, enter into thy closet—and shut the door.’ We should
retire into a quiet place and keep off external distractions.
Cp. Origen’s description of the first hermits: “They dwelt in
the desert where the air was more pure and the heaven more
open and God more familiar.”

ekaki: alone. The teacher insists that the seeker should be
alone to feel the gentle pressure, to hear the quiet voice.

yatacittatma: self-controlled. He must not be excited, strained
or anxious. To learn to be quiet before God means a life of control
and discipline. Atma is used in the sense of deha or body,
according to $. and Sridhara. It is no use entering the closet
with the daily paper and the business file. Even if we leave
them outside and shut the doors and windows, we may have
an unquiet time with all our worries and preoccupations. There
should be no restlessness or turbulence. Through thoughts we
appeal to the intellect; through silence we touch the deeper

‘ It is what Boehme calls the “‘stopping the wheel of the imagina-

tion and ceasing from self-thinking..
* Matthew vi, 6.194 The Bhagavadgita

layers of being. The heart must become clean if it is to reflect
God who is to be seen and known only by the pure in heart.
We must centre down into that deep stillness and wait on the
Light. ‘Commune with your Father which is in secret.” The
Living Presence of God is revealed in silence to each soul
according to his capacity, and need.

Plato’s Meno begins with the question, “Can you tell me,
Socrates, is virtue to be taught?” The answer of Socrates is, that
virtue is not taught but “recollected.” Recollection is a gathering
of one’s self together, a retreat into one’s soul. The doctrine of
“recollection” suggests that each individual should enquire within
himself. He is his own centre and possesses the truth in himself.
What is needed is that he should have the will and the per-
severance to follow it up. The function of the teacher is not to
teach but to help to put the learner in possession of himself. The
questioner has the true answer in himself, if only he can be
delivered of it. Every man is in possession of the truth and is
dispossessed of it by his entanglement in the objective world.
By identifying ourselves with the objective world, we are ejected
or alienated from our true nature. Lost in the outer world,
we desert the deeps. In transcending the object, physical and
mental, we find ourselves in the realm of freedom.

nirasi: free from desires. Worry about daily needs, about
earning and spending money, disturbs meditation and takes us
away from the life of the spirit. So we are asked to be free from
desire and anxiety born of it, from greed and fear. The seeker
should try to tear himself away from these psychic fetters and
get detached from all distractions and prejudices. He must put
away all clinging to mental preferences, vital aims, attachment
to family and friends. He must expect nothing, insist on nothing.

aparigrahah: free from longing for possessions. This freedom
is a spiritual state, not a material condition. We must control the
appetite for possessions, free ourselves from the tyranny of
belongings. One cannot hear God’s voice, if one is restless and
self-centred, if one is dominated by feelings of pride, self-will or
possessiveness. The Gita points out that true happiness is inward.

 

1 Cp. Wordsworth’s statement, that “poetry takes its origin from
emotion recollected in tranquillity.” Rilke in his Letters to a Young
Poet says: “I can give you no other advice than this, retire into
yourself and probe the depths from which your life springs up.”V1. The True Yoga 195

It invites our attention to the manner of our life, the state of
human consciousness, which does not depend on the outward
machinery of life. The body may die and the world pass away
but the life in spirit endures. Our treasures are not the things
of the world that perish but the knowledge and love of God that
endure. We must get out of the slavery to things to gain the
glad freedom of spirit.:

11 $ucau dese pratisthapya
sthivam asanam atmanah
na ’tyucchritam na ‘tinicam
catlajinakusottaram

(x1) Having set in a clean place his firm seat, neither too
high nor too low, covered with sacred grass, a deerskin, and
a cloth, one over the other,

12 tatrai 'kagram manah krtva
yatacittendriyakriyah
uparisya ‘sane yuitjyad
yogam atmavisuddhaye

(12) There taking his place on the seat, making his mind
one-pointed and controlling his thought and sense, let him
practise yoga for the purification of the soul.

yoga here means dhyana yoga, meditation. To realize truth,
man raust be delivered from the clutches of practical interests
which are bound up with our exterior and material life. The
chief condition is a disciplined disinterestedness. We must
develop the power to see things as a free undistorted intelligence
would see them. For this we must get ourselves out of the way.
When Pythagoras was questioned why he called himself a philo-

«To the rich man who said that he had kept all the command-
ments, Jesus answered, “Yet lackest thou one thing: sell all that
thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure
in heaven.” When Jesus saw that the rich man was very sorrowful,
he said: “How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the
Kingdom of God! For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s
eye, than for a rich mar to enter into the Kingdom of God.” S’, Luke
xviii, 18-23.196 The Bhagavadgtta

sopher he gave the following story. He compared human life with,
the great festival at Olympia where all the world comes together
in a motley crowd. Some are there to do business at the fair and
enjoy themselves. Others wish to win the wreath in the contest
and some others are merely spectators and these last are the
philosophers. They keep themselves free from the urgencies of
immediate problems and practical necessities. $. points out that
the essential qualifications of a seeker of wisdom are a capacity
to discriminate between the eternal and the non-eternal, detach-
ment from the enjoyment of the fruits of action, terrestrial and
celestial, self-control and an ardent desire for spiritual freedom."
For Plato, the aim of all knowledge is to raise us to the contem-
plation of the idea of good, the source alike of being and knowing,
and the ideal philosopher is one whose goal, at the end of a life
lived to the full, “is always a life of quiet, of indrawn stillness,
of solitude and aloofness, in which the world forgetting, by the
world forgot, he finds his heaven in lonely contemplation of the
‘good.’ That and that alone is really life.” “Blessed are the pure
in heart for they shall see God.” This purification of the heart,
cittaguddhi, is a matter of discipline. Plotinus tells us that “wis-
dom is a condition in a being at rest.’

13. samam kdyastrogrivam
adharayann acalam sthirah
sampreksya nasikagram svam
digas ca navalokayan

(13) Holding the body, head and neck, erect and still,
looking fixedly at the tip of his nose, without looking around
(without allowing his eyes to wander).

Posture or dsana is here mentioned. Pataiijali points out that
the posture should be steady and pleasing so as to aid concen-
tration. A right posture gives serenity of body. The body must
be kept clean if the living image of God is to be installed in it.

saripreksya nasikdgram. The gaze is to be fixed on the tip of
the nose. A wandering gaze is not a help to concentration

+ nitydnityavastuviveka, thamutraphalabhogavirdgah, Samddisadhana
sanipat, mumuksutvam.
> Enneads, 1V, 4, 12.VI. The True Yoga 197

14 prasantatma vigatabhir
brahmacarivrate sthitah
manah sanyamya maccitio
yukta asita matparah

(t4) Serene and fearless, firm in the vow of celibacy, subdued
in mind, let him sit, harmonized, his mind turned to Me
and intent on Me alone.

brahmacarivrate sthitah: firm in the vow of celibacy. The
aspirant for yoga must exercise control over sex impulses, Hindu
tradition has insisted on brahmacarya from the beginning. In
the Prasna Up., Pippalada asks the seekers to observe brahma-
carya for a year more at the end of which he undertakes to
initiate them into the highest wisdom. In Chandogya Up., Brahma
taught Indra the knowledge of Reality after making him undergo
brahmacarya for ror years. Brahmacarya is defined as abstinence
from sex intercourse in thought, word and deed in all conditions
and places and times.t The gods are said to have conquered
death by brahmacarya and penance.? In Jadnasamtkalini Tantra,
Siva says that true tapas is brahmacarya and he who practises
it uninterruptedly is divine, not human.3 It is not ascetic celibacy
that is meant by brahmacarya, but control. Hindu tradition
affirms that a householder who controls his sex life is a brahmacdri

* Yajfiavalkya writes:
karmand manasd vaca sarvavasthasu sarvada
sarvatra matthunatyago brahmacaryam pracaksate,

* brahmacaryena tapasd deva mytyum updghnata. Atharva Veda.

3 na tapas tapa ity ahuh brahmacaryarh tapottamam
dirdhvareta bhaved yastu sa devo na tu manusah.

The difficulty of chastity is illustrated in the lives of many saints,
St. Augustine used to pray: “Give me chastity and continence, only
not yet.” Confessions, Bk VIII, Ch. VII. Rodin has the whole thing
in a piece of sculpture called the Eternal Idol where a woman on her
knees, but leaning backward, with body thrust forward and arms

ing loose receives between her breasts the bearded face of a man
who kneels before her in servile longing for her embrace. There is
hardly one man in a thousand who will not put aside his ideals, his
highest vision, everything which for him represents God in order
to get the woman he loves. In the opinion of many contemporaries
chastity is a condition which is as selfish as it is dull. To them the
Hindu emphasis on it may seem somewhat odd and exaggerated.198 The Bhagavadgita

quite as truly as one who abstains from sex altogether.! To be
a celibate is not to deaden the senses and deny the heart.

The qualities demanded for the practice of Yoga may be com-
pared with the three Evangelical counsels of Poverty, Chastity
and Obedience by which we overcome the world, the flesh and
the devil.

The negative process of bringing all thoughts to a standstill
has for its positive side, concentration on the Self [évara-
pranidhana is a recognized way in yoga discipline. The mind
becomes still but not vacant, for it is fixed on the Supreme
macettiah matparah.

Only the single-visioned see the Real. Spiritual life is not
prayer or petition. It is profound devoutness, silent meditation,
the opening of the consciousness to the innermost depths of the
soul, which connect the individual self directly with the Divine
Principle. Those who learn this art do not require any external
assistance, any belief in dogma or participation in ritual. They
acquire the creative vision since they combine absorption with
detachment. They act in the world, but the passionless tranquillity
of the spirit remains undisturbed. They are compared to the
lotus on the lake which is unruffled by the tide.

15 yuhjann evam sada ’tmanam
yogi niyalamanasah
Santi mirvanaparamam

matsamstham adhigacchati

(15) The yogin of subdued mind, ever keeping himself thus
harmonized, attains to peace, the supreme nirvana, which
abides in Me

16. nd 'tyasnatas tu yogo ’sti
na cai ’kantam anasnatah
na ca 'tisvapnasilasya
jagrato nat ‘va ca ’rjuna
t bhdryaen gacchan brahmacdrt ytau bhavati vat dvijah M.B. See
also Manu
Hindu tradition looks upon Ahalya, Sité, Mandodari, Draupadi
and Tara as models of chastity, mahdpativraia. They are also
called paiivamahakanya@. Thomas Hardy asks us to look upon Tess
as a pure woman Chastity is a condition of mind.VI. The True Yoga 199

(x6) Verily, yoga is not for him who eats too much or
abstains too much from eating. It is not for him, O Arjuna,
who sleeps too much or keeps awake too much.

We must be free from animal cravings. We must avoid excess
in all things. Compare with this the middle path of the Buddhists,
the golden mean of Aristotle.

17. yuktaharaviharasya
yuktacestasya karmasu
yuktasvapnavabodhasya
yogo bhavati dubkhaha

(7) For the man who is temperate in food and recreation,
who is restrained in his actions, whose sleep and waking
are regulated, there ensues discipline (yoga) which destroys
all sorrow

It is not complete abstinence from action but restraint in action
that is advised. When the ego is established in the Self, it lives
in a transcendent and universal consciousness and acts from that
centre.

The Perfect Yogi

18 yada uiniyatam cittam
atmany eva ’vatisthate
nihsprhah sarvakamebhyo
yukta ity ucyate tada

(18) When the disciplined mind is established in the Self
alone, liberated from all desires, then is he said to be har-
monized (in yoga).

Complete effacement of the ego is essential for the vision of
truth. Every taint of individuality should disappear, if truth is
to be known. There should be an elimination of all our prejudices
and idiosyncrasies.

In these verses, the teacher gives the procedure by which
the seeker can gain the experience of the Essential! Self. In the
ordinary experience of the outer or the inner world, the Self
in union with the body is immersed in phenomenal multiplicity
and remains veiled because of it. We should first of all empty the200 The Bhagavadgita

soul of every specific operation, rid it of every image, of every
particular representation, of every distinct operation of mind.
This is a negative process. It may be thought that by draining
our consciousness of every image, we end in a pure and simple
nothingness. The teacher makes out that the negative process
is adopted to apprehend the Pure Self, ta achieve the beatific
vision. The silence is made perfect and the void is consummated
through this apparently negative but intensely vital mystical
contemplation, involving a tension of the forces of the soul. It
is an experience which transcends all knowledge, for the Self is
not an object expressible in a concept or presentable to mind as
an object. It is inexpressible subjectivity.

19. yatha dipo mivdtastho
ne ‘tigate so ’pamad smrta
yogino yatacitiasya
yunjato yogam atmanah
(rg) As a lamp in a windless place flickereth not, to such is
likened the yogi of subdued thought who practises union
with the Self (or discipline of himself)
The yogi’s thought is absorbed in the Atman. Fleeting glimpses
or passing visions should not be confused with the insight into
Atman which is the one safeguard against all delusions.

20. yairo ’paramate cittam
niruddham yogasevaya
yatra cai "va ‘tmand ’tmanam
pasyann dtmani tusyati
(20) That in which thought is at rest, restrained by the
practice of concentration, that in which he beholds the Self
through the self and rejoices in the Self;

21. sukham atyantikam yat tad
buddhigrahyam atindriyam
vetti yatra na cat 'va 'yam
sthitas calati tativatah
(21) That in which he finds this supreme delight, perceived
by the intelligence and beyond the reach of the senses,
wherein established, he no longer falls away from the truth;VI. The True Yoga 20%

See Katha Up., III, 12. While the Supreme is beyond percep-
tion by the senses, it is seizable by reason, not by the reason
which deals with sense data and frames concepts on their basis
but reason which works in its own right. When it does so, it
becomes aware of things not indirectly, through the medium of
the senses or the relations based on them, but by becoming one
with them. All true knowledge is knowledge by identity. Our
knowledge through physical contact or mental symbols is indirect
and approximate. Religion is contemplative realization of God.

22 yam labdhvd ca ’param labham
manyate na 'dhikam tatah
yasmin sthito na duhkhena

‘ guruna ’pi vicalyate

(22) That, on gaining which he thinks that there is no
greater gain beyond it, wherein established he is not shaken
even by the heaviest sorrow;

23 tam vidyad duhkhasamyoga-
viyogam yogasarijititam
Sa niscayena yoktavyo
yogo 'nirvinnacetasd

(23) Let that be known by the name of yoga, this discon-
nection from union with pain. This yoga should be practised
with determination, with heart undismayed.

In verses 10-22 the intense fixation of the mind on its object
with a view to liberation is taught. It is the repose of the liberated
spirit in its own absoluteness and isolation. The self rejoices in
the Self. It is the kaivalya of the Sarhkhya purusa, though, in
the Gita, it becomes identified with blessedness in God.

anirvinnacetasa: nirvedarahitena cetasa. S. We must practise
yoga without slackness of effort arising from the thought of pro-
spective pain.

« Madhusidana cites the verse,

samadhinirdhitamalasya cetaso nwesitasy atmani yat sukham bhavet
na sakyate varnayitum gird tada svayam tad antabkaranenu grhyate.202 The Bhagavadgita

24 samkalpaprabhavan kamams
tyakiva sarvan asesatah

manasai ve ndriyagramanm
viniyamya samantatah

(24) Abandoning without exception all desires born of
(selfish) will, restraining with the mind all the senses on every
side;

25. Sanaih-Sanair uparamed
buddhya dhrtigrhitaya
atmasamstham manah kriva
na kimcid api cintayet
(25) Let him gain little by little tranquillity by meags of
reason controlled by steadiness and having fixed the mind
on the Self, let him not think of anything (else).

26. yato-yato niscarati
manas caicalam asthiram
tatas-tato niyamyat ‘tad
atmany eva vasSam nayet

(26) Whatsoever makes the wavering and unsteady mind
wander away let him restrain and bring it back to the control
of the Self alone

27. prasantamanasam hy enam
yoginam sukham uttlamam
upaiti Santarajasam
brahmabhitam akalmasam
(27) For supreme happiness comes to the yogin whose

mind is peaceful, whose passions are at rest, who is stainless
and has become one with God.

brahmabhiitam: one with God. We become what we behold
according to the rule of the wasp and the bee, bhramarakijanyaya.
Even as the wasp which is threatened by the bee thinks of the
bee so intently that it itself is transformed into the bee, so also
the upasaka (meditator) becomes one with the object of medi-
tation (upasya).VI. The True Yoga 203

brakmatvam praptam. Sridhara.*

Progress consists in the purification of body, life and mind.
When the frame is perfected, the Light shines without any
obstruction.

28. yuijann evam sada ’tmananm
yogi vigatakalmasah
sukhena brahmasamsparsam
atyantam sukham asnute

(28) Thus making the self ever harmonized, the yogin,
who has put away sin, experiences easily the infinite bliss of
contact with the Eternal.

brahmasamsparsam: contact with the Eternal. God is no more
a mere rumour, a vague aspiration, but a vivid reality with which
we are in actual contact. Religion is not a matter of dialectic but
a fact of experience. Reason may step in and offer a logical
explanation of the fact but the reasoning becomes irrelevant, if
it is not based on the solid foundation of fact.

Besides, these facts of religious experience are universal, in
space and in time. They are found in different parts of the world
and different periods of its history, attesting to the persistent
unity and aspiration of the human spirit. The illuminations of
the Hindu and the Buddhist seers, of Socrates and Plato, of
Philo and Plotinus, of Christian and Muslim mystics, belong to
the same family, though the theological attempts to account for
them reflect the temperaments of the race and the epoch.

In the following verses the teacher describes the marks of the
ideal yogin. His thought is subdued, his desire is cast off and he
contemplates only the Self and is cut off from contact with pain
and is at one with the Supreme Reality.

29. sarvabhiitastham dtmanam
sarvabhiitani ca ’tmani
thsate yogayuktatma
sarvatra samadarsanah
® Nilakantha believes that this state is one of samprajiidta
samadhi and quotes Yogabhasya: yastu ehgre cetasi sadbhiitam aytham
pradyotayati karmabandhanani Slathayati nirodham abhimukhi hay oti
hsinoti ca klesan sa samprajiato yoga ity akhyayate.204 The Bhagavadgita

(29) He whose self is harmonized by yoga seeth the Self
abiding in all beings and all beings in the Self; everywhere
he sees the same

Though, in the process of attaining the vision of Self, we had
to retreat from outward things and separate the Self from the
world, when the vision is attained the world is drawn into the
Self. On the ethical plane, this means that there should grow a
detachment from the world and when it is attained, a return to
it, through love, suffering and sacrifice for it.

The sense of a separate finite self with its hopes and fears, its
likes and dislikes is destroyed.

30 yo mam pasyati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pasyati
tasya *ham na pranasyami

Sa ca me na pranasyati

(30) He who sees Me every where and sees all in Me; I am
not lost to him nor is he lost to Me. .

It is personal mysticism as distinct from the impersonal one
that is stressed in these tender and impressive words: “I am not
lost to him nor is he lost to Me.” The verse reveals the experience
of the profound unity of all things in One who is the personal
God. The more unique, the more universal. The deeper the self,
the wider is its comprehension. When we are one with the Divine
in us, we become one with the whole stream of life.

31 sarvabhiitasthitam yo mam
bhajaty ekatvam asthitah
sarvatha vartamano 'pi
Sa yogi mayi variate
(31) The yogin who established in oneness, worships Me
abiding in all beings lives in Me, howsoever he may be
actiye
Whatever be his outer life, in his inward being he dwells in
God. The true life of man is his inner life.VI. The True Yoga 205

32. dimaupamyena sarvatra
samam pasyati yo ’vjuna
sukham va yadi va duhkhanm
sa yogi paramo matah
(32) He, O Arjuna, who sees with equality everything, in
the image of his own self, whether in pleasure or in pain,
he is considered a perfect yogi
Atma-aupamya means equality of others with oneself. Even
as he desires good to himself, he desires good to all. He embraces
all things in God, leads men to divine life and acts in the world
with the power of Spirit and in that luminous consciousness. He
harms no creature as, in the words of S., “he sees that whatever
is pleasant to himself is pleasant to all creatures, and that what-
ever is painful to himself is painful to all beings.”? He does not
any more shrink from pleasure and pain. As he sees God in the
world, he fears nothing but embraces all in the equality of the
vision of the Self.

Control of Mind is Difficult but Possible

arjuna uvaca
33. yo ‘yam yogas tuaya proktak
samyena madhusiidana
etasya "ham na pasyami
caficalatudt sthitim sthiram
Arjuna said:

(33) This yoga declared by you to be of the nature of
equality (evenness of mind), O Madhusiidana (Krsna), I
see no stable foundation for, on account of restlessness.

34 cafcalam hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdham
tasya "ham nigraham manye
vayor tva suduskaram
+ yathd mama sukham istam tatha sarvapraninam sukham anukilam
yadi va yacca dubkham mama pratikilam anistam yatha tatha sarva-
praninath dubkham anistam . . . na kasyacit pratikilam @cavati
ahimsaka ity arthah206 The Bhagavadgita

(34) For the mind is verily fickle, O Krsna, it is impetuous,
strong and obstinate. I think that it is as difficult to control
as the wind.

Sribhagavan uvaca
35 asarmSayam mahabaho
mano durnigraham calam
abhyasena tu kaunteya
vairagyena ca grhyate
The Blessed Lord said:
(35) Without doubt, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), the mind is

difficult to curb and restless but it can be controlled, O Son
of Kunti (Arjuna), by constant practice and non-attachment.

Cp. Yoga Siitra, 1, 12. abhydsavairagyabhyam tan nirodhah.
The teacher points out that the restless mind, accustomed to
act on impulse, can be controlled only by non-attachment! and
practice.

Arjuna realizes that there is so much of obstinacy and violence,
waywardness and self-will in human nature. We are inclined to
shut our eyes to the defects of our nature and harden our hearts
against the Light. Tapasya is what is needed.

30 asamyatatmana yogo
dusprapa iti me matih
vasydimand tu yatata
Sakyo ’vaptum upadyatah

(36) Yoga is hard to attain, I agree, by one who is not self-
controlled; but by the self-controlled it is attainable by
striving through proper means

« When there is earth to lie upon, why trouble about bed? When
one’s arm is readily available, why need pillows? When there is the
palm of one’s hand, why seek for plates and utensils? When there
is the atmosphere, the bark of trees etc., what need is there of
silks?

satyarh ksitau him kasspob prayasash bahau samsiddhe hy upa
barhanaih him

satyarijalau kirk purudhannapatraih digualkaladau sati kirk
dukidlaih, Bhagavata, 1, 2, 4.VI. The True Yoga 207
Arjuna asks what happens to the soul who attempts and fails,
Defeat is temporary: He who starts well reaches the End.

arjuna uvaca
37. ayatih sraddhayo ’peto
yogac calitamanasah
aprapya yogasamsiddhim
kam gatim krsna gacchati

(37) He who cannot control himself though he has faith,
with the mind wandering away from yoga, failing to attain
perfection in yoga, what way does he go, O Krsna*~

Arjuna’s question refers to the future of those, who, when
they die are not at war with Eternal Goodness though they are
not disciplined enough to contemplate the splendour of Eternal
Purity. Are the alternatives eternal heaven and everlasting hell
as some believe or is there a chance for such individuals to grow
towards perfection after death?

38. kaccin no ’bhayavibhrastas
chinnabhram iva nasyati
apratistho mahabaho
vimiidho brahmanah pathi

(38) Does he not perish like a rent cloud, O Mighty-armed
(Krsna), fallen from both and without any hold and
bewildered in the path that leads to the Eternal?

Fallen from both, ito bhrastah tato bhrastah, is he left in a
no man’s world? Does he miss both this life and the life eternal?
What happens to those numerous persons who have not succeeded
in pursuing the extremely difficult path of yoga to its end? Are
their exertions useless altogether? Is it any good beginning a
course which one may not be able to complete?

39 etan me samSayam krsna
chettum arhasy asesatah
twadanyah sarSayasya ’sya
chetta na hy upapadyate208 The Bhagavadgita

(39) Thou shouldst dispel completely this, my doubt,
O Krsna, for there is none else than Thyself who can destroy
this doubt.

Sribhagavin wica
40. partha nai ‘ve ‘ha na 'mutra
vindSas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyanakyt kascid
durgatim tata gacchati
The Blessed Lord said:
(40) O, Partha (Arjuna), neither in this life nor hereafter
is there destruction for him; for never does any one who does
good, dear friend, tread the path of woe.

No man of honest life can come to grief. No good man car
come to an evil end. God knows our weaknesses and the efforts
we make to overcome them. We must not despair for even failure
here is success and no sincere attempt will go without its reward.
Eckhart says: “If thou do not fail in intention, but only in
capacity, verily, thou hast done all in the sight of God.” Cp.
Goethe: “Whoever strives and labours, him may we bring
redemption.”

41 prapya punyakrtam lokan
usitud Sasvatth samah
Sucinawi Srimatam gehe
yogabhrasto *bhijayate
(41) Having attained to the world of the righteous and
dwelt there for very many years, the man who has fallen
away from yoga is again born in the house of such as are
pure and prosperous.
SaSvatih: very many; not everlasting.
Sucindm: righteous. In VI, 11, cleanliness refers to the outer
side; here inward purity is indicated.
1 gaucari tu dvividham proktam bahyam abhyantararh tatha

myjjalabhyaen smytam bahyam, bhdvasuddis tatha’ntaram.
Vyaghrapada quoted in Madhavaparasara.VI. The True Yoga 209

42 athava yogindm eva
kule bhavati dhimatam
etad dhi durlabhataram
loke janma yad idysam

+ (42) Or he may be born in the family of yogins’ who arc
endowed with wisdom. For such a birth as this is more
difficult to obtain in the world.

43. tatra tam buddhisamyogam
labhate paurvadehtkam
yatate ca tato bhityah
samsiddhau kurunandana

(43) There he regains the (mental) impressions (of union
with the Divine) which he had developed in his previous
life and with this (as the starting point) he strives again for
perfection, O Joy of the Kurus (Arjuna).

Progress on the path to perfection is slow and one may have
to tread through many lives before reaching the end. But no
effort is wasted. The relations we form and the powers we acquire
do not perish at death. They will be the starting point of later
developments.

44. piirvabhydsena tenai’va
hriyate hy avaso 'pi sah
jijnasur api yogasya
Sabdabrahma 'tivartate
(44) By his former practice, he is carried on irresistibly.
Even the secker after the knowledge of yoga goes beyond
the Vedic rule.

Sabdabrahma: Vedic rule. It refers to the Veda and the injunc-
tions set forth in it. By practising the Vedic rule, we are liclped
to get beyond it. Cp. “Brahman is of two kinds, the Sabdabrahma
and the other beyond it. When a person has become well versed
in the Sabdabrahma, he reaches the Brahman which is beyond
it."1 Then faith ends in experience, tongues shall cease and
doctrine shall fade away. The stimulus to religion is generally

Mauri Up., VI, 22. Cp. also Visnu Purana : sabdabrahmani
nisndtah param brahmadhigacchati, VI, 5.210 The Bhagavadgita

supplied by the study of holy writ or participation in a cult. This
is helpful until spontaneity becomes so great and absolute as to
require no indirect help. Ordinarily the study of the Veda is a
quickening influence. But when once we have the awakening
which is sufficient unto itself, we need no external aid and so
pass beyond Sabdabrahma or any institutional guidance. One
who proposes to cross a river needs a boat, but “let him no
longer use the Law as a means of arrival when he has arrived.”
Majjhima Nikaya, I, 135. R. takes Sabdabrahma to mean
prakyti.
45. prayatnad yatamanas tu
yogi samsuddhakilbisah
anekajanmasamsiddhas

tato yati param gatim
(45) But the yogi who strives with assiduity, cleansed of all
sins, perfecting himself through many lives, then attains to
the highest goal.

Though he may fail through weakness to reach the goal of
perfection in this life, the lessons of his effort will abide with
him after death and help him in his progress in other lives until
he attains the goal. God’s purpose will not be accomplished
until all human beings are redeemed by forgiveness, repentance
and healing discipline and restored into communion with the
Supreme. Every soul will be won back to God who created him
in His own image. God’s love wi'l finally restore into harmony
with itself even the most rebellious elements. The Gitd gives usa
hopeful belief in the redemption of all.

The Perfect Yogi

46. tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogi
jnanibhyo pi mato ‘dhikah
karmibhyas ca ’dhiko yogi

tasmad yogi bhava ’rjuna
(46) The yogin is greater than the ascetic; he is considered
to be greater than the man of knowledge, greater than the
man of ritual works, therefore do thou become a yogin,
O Arjuna.VI The True Yoga 2Ir

Here the teacher is making out that the yogin here described
is superior to the tapasvin, who retires to the forest for per-
forming severe fasts and arduous practices, to the jfianin who
adopts the way of knowledge for obtaining release, with renun-
ciation of action, to the karmin who performs the rites enjoined
in the Vedas for obtaining rewards. The yoga which is said to
be superior to the tapas, jfiina and karma, has the best of al)
the three and includes devotion also. Such a yogin pours himself
forth in utter worship of the Divine seated within the hearts of
all and his life is one of self-forgetful service under the guidance
of the Divine light.

Yoga or union with God which is attained through bhakti is
the highest goal. The next verse points out that even among
yogins, the greatest is the devotee or the bhakta.

Jaana here means Sastrapanditya or scriptural learning (S.) and
not spiritual realization. .

47 yoginim api sarvesim
madgatena 'ntaratmana
Sraddhavan bhajate yo marit
sa me yuktatamo matah
(47) And of all yogins, he who full of faith worships Me,
with his inner self abiding in Me, him, I hold to be the most
attuned (to me in Yoga).

After giving a long account of the yoga discipline, the obstacles
to be overcome, the teacher concludes that the great yogin is the
great devotee (bhakta).

wi... dhyénayogo nama sastho ’dhyayah
This is the sixth chapter entitled The Yoga of MeditationCHAPTER VII
God and the World

God is Nature and Spirit
Sribhagavan uvaca
I mayy asaktamanah partha
yogam yuijan madasrayah
asamSayam samagramn mam
yatha jrasyast tac chrnu
The Blessed Lord said:

(1) Hear then, O Partha (Arjuna), how, practising yoga.
with the mind clinging to Me, with Me as thy refuge, thou
shalt know Me in full, without any doubt.

The author wishes to give a complete or integral knowledge
of the Divine, not merely the Pure Self but Its manifestation in
the world.

2. jhanam te 'ham savijhanam
idam vaksyamy asesatah
yaj jnatva ne 'ha bhiiyo ’nyaj
fhatavyam avasisyate
(2) I will declare to thee in full this wisdom together with
knowledge by knowing which there shall remain nothing
more here left to be known.

See III, 41 note. Jiiana is interpreted as wisdom, the direct
spiritual illumination and vijiiana as the detailed rational know-
ledge of the principles of existence. We must have not merely
knowledge of the relationless Absolute but also of Its varied
manifestation. The Supreme is in man and nature though these
do not limit Him.

3 manusyandm sahasresu

kascid yatati siddhaye

yatalam api siddhanam
haScin mam vetti tattvatahVII. God and the World 213

(3) Among thousands of men scarcely one strives for per-
fection and of those who strive and succeed, scarcely one
knows Me in truth.

Another reading: yatatém ca sahasranam: “and of thousands
of strivers.” Most of us do not even feel the need for perfection.
We grope along by the voice of tradition and authority. Of those
who strive to see the truth and reach the goal, only a few succeed,
Of those who gain the sight, not even one learns to walk and live
by the sight.

The Two Natures of the Lora

4. bhiimir apo ’nalo vayuh
kharn mano buddhir eva ca
ahamkarva iti "yam me
dhinna prakytir astadha
(4) Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind and understanding
and self-sense—this is the eightfold division of My nature.

prakrtib. Nature, which is identified with gakti or maya,t the
basis of the objective world.*

These are the forms which unmanifested nature, prakrti, takes
when it becomes manifested. This is an early classification which
later becomes elaborated into twenty-four principles. See XIII, 5.
The senses, mind and understanding, indriyas, manas and buddhi,
belong to the lower, the material nature. For, according to the
Sarhkhya psychology, which is accepted by the Vedanta, they
effect contact with objects and consciousness results only when
the spiritual subject, purusa, illuminates them. When the self
illumines, the activities of the senses, of mind and of understanding
become processes of knowledge and objects become objects of
knowledge. Aharhkara or the self-sense belongs to the “object”
side. It is the principle by which the ego relates objects to itself.
It attributes to itself the body and the senses connected with it.
It effects the false identification of the body with the spiritual
subject and the sense of “‘I’’ or “‘my” is produced.

+ mayakhya paramesvari Sakti anirvacantyasvabhavd trigundtmika.
Madhusidana.

» jadaprapattcopadamabhita, Nilakantha214 The Bhagavadgita

5 apare ’yam itas tu anydasit
prakytin viddhi me param
jivabhitan mahabaho
yaye dam dharyate jagut

(5) This is My lower nature. Know My other and higher
nature which is the soul, by which this world is upheld.
O Mighty-armed (Arjuna).

The Supreme is [gvara, the personal Lord of the universe
who contains conscious souls (ksetrajiia) and unconscious
nature (ksetra). The two are regarded as His higher (para) and
lower (apara) aspects. He is the life and form of every being.t The
Universal Being of God includes the totality of the unconscious
in His lower nature and the totality of the conscious in His
higher. The embodiment of the soul in body, life, sense, mind
and understanding gives us the ego, which uses the material
setting for its activity. Each individual has two sides, the soul
and the image, ksetrajfia and ksetra. These are the two natures
of Igvara who is superior to them both.* The Old Testament
teaches creation out of nothing. Plato and Aristotle assume a
primitive matter to which God gives form. God is an artificer
or architect rather than a creator, for primitive substance is
thought of as eternal and uncreated and only form is due to the
will of God. For Christian thinkers, God creates not from any
pre-existent matter but out of nothing. Both matter and form
are derived from God. A similar view is set forth in this verse.
The jiva is only a partial manifestation of the Supreme. The
integral undivided reality of the Supreme appears divided into
the multiplicity of souls.4 The unity is the truth and multiplicity
is an expression of it and so is a lower truth but not an illusion.

+ uisuddham prakrtim mamdtmabhitarh viddhi me pardra prakystann
jivabhitam ksetrajnalaksanim, pranadharanamumittabhitam. $

2 Cp. the Bhagavata.

Salutations unto Thee the Self, the sovereign of all, the witness,
the great spirit, the source of souls as well as of the ever productive
nature.

ksetrayhaya namas tubhyam sarvadhyaksiya stksine
purusdy atmamilaya milaprakvtaye namah.
VIIL. 3. 13.

3 XV, 7. XIII, 16.VII. God and the World 215

6. etadyonini bhitant
sarvani ty upadhdraya
aham krtsnasya jagatah
prabhavah pralayas tatha
(6) Know that all beings have their birth in this. I am
the origin of all this world and its dissolution as well.

The world with all its becomings is from the Supremet and
at the time of dissolution is withdrawn into Him. Cp. Taittiriye
Up., III. God includes the universe within Himself, projects it
from and resumes it within Himself, that is, His own nature.

7. mattah parataram na ’nyat
kimeid asti dhanarjaya
mayi sarvam idam protam
Stitre maniganad wa
(7) There is nothing whatever that is higher than I, O
Winner of wealth (Arjuna). All that is here is strung on me
as rows of gems on a string.

There is no other higher principle than Igvara who effects
everything and is everything. The existences of the world are
held together by the Supreme Spirit even as the gems are by
the string.

8. vaso "ham apsu kaunteya
prabha ’smi SaSisitryayoh
pranavah sarvavedesu
Sabdah khe paurusam nysu
(8) I am the taste in the waters, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna),
I am the light in the moon and the sun. I am the syllable
Aum in all the Vedas; I am the sound in ether and manhood
in men,
9. punyo gandhah prihivyam ca
tejas ca ’smi vibhdvasau
jivanam sarvabhiitesu
tapas ca ’smi tapasvisu
«Cp. XIV, 3, mama yonir mahad brahma. See also Mundaka Up.

I, 1, 6 and Ili, 1, 3, aksararm bhidtayonim . . . purusart bhiitayonim
Brahma Siitra: yonis' ca giyate. I, 4, 27.2x6 The Bhagavadgita

(9) I am the pure fragrance in earth and brightness in fire.

IT am the life in all existences and the austerity in ascetics.
Cp. “Thou art Reality, the Divine Spirit, not material, not life-

less, Thou art the life of the universe, the life of all creatures.”*

10. bijam mam sarvabhitinam
viddhi partha sandtanam
buddhir buddhimatim asmi
tejas tejasvindm aham
(zo) Know Me, O Partha (Arjuna), to be the eternal seed
of all existences. I am the intelligence of the intelligent;
I am the splendour of the splendid.

11. balam balavatam ca hams
kdmaradgavivarjitam
dharmaviruddho bhiitesu
kamo 'smi bharatarsabha

(tz) T am the strength of the strong, devoid of desire and
passion. In beings am I the desire which is not contrary to
Jaw, O Lord of the Bharatas (Arjuna).

‘ Ramaraga: desire and passion. §. distinguishes kama as desire
for what is absent? and raga as affection for what one has ob-
tained.3 Desire as such is not evil. Selfish desire requires to be
rooted out. The desire for union with the Divine is not wrong.
Chandogya Up. refers to desires as essentially real (satya), though
overlaid by what is unreal (anrta), VIII, 3. Our desires and
activities, if they are expressive of the spirit in us and derive
from the true spiritual personality, become a pure overflowing
of the Divine will.

12. ye cai ’va sattvika bhava
rajasas tamasa$ ca ye
matta eve ’ti tan viddhi
na tv aham tesu te mayt
1 warm satyam devadevatmarh na jado na mytopi va,
jagatan jivitam ca twam praninam jivitam tatha,

1 kamah, trsnd asannikystesu visayesu
3 vdgah, ranjand praptesu visayesu.VII. God and the World 217

(12) And whatever states of being there may be, be they
harmonious (sattvika), passionate (rajasa), slothful (tamasa)
—know thou that they are all from Me alone. I am not in
them, they are in Me.

The author rejects the Sarnkhya doctrine of the independence
of prakrti. He asserts that everything constituted by the three
gunas is in no sense a self-dependent essence independent of God,
but springs from Him alone. While He contains and comprehends
all, they do not contain and comprehend Him. This is the dis-
tinction between God and His creatures. They are all informed
by the Divine but their changes do not touch the integrity of the
Divine. He is not subject to any one else, while all things are
subject to Him.

The Modes of Nature Confuse Men

13. wibhir gunamayair bhavair
ebhih sarvam idam jagat
mohitam na ’bhijandte
mam ebhyah param avyayam
(13) Deluded by these threefold modes of nature (gunas)
this whole world does not recognize Me who am above them
and imperishable.

S. says that the Supreme expresses His regret that the world
does not know Him, the Supreme Lord who is, by nature, eternal,
pure, enlightened and free, the self of all beings, devoid of attri-
butes; by knowing whom the seed of the evil of sarhsara is
burnt up.t

‘We see the changing forms and not the Eternal Being of which
the forms are the manifestations. We see the shifting forms as
Plato’s dwellers in the cave see the shadows on the wall. But we
must see the Light from which the shadows emanate.

 

14. daivi hy esd gunamayt
mama maya duratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayan etm taranti te
* evathbhitam api paramesvaramn nityasuddhabuddhamuktasvabha-
vari sarvabhitdtmanaum, nirgunan samsavadosabijapradahakaranan,
mara, ndbhijanati jagad ity anukrosar darsayati bhagavan,218 The Bhagavadgita

(14) This divine maya of Mine, consisting of the modes is
hard to overcome. But those who take refuge in Me alone
cross beyond it.
daivt: divine. Supernatural* or belonging to the supreme Lord.2
mayam etam taranti:3 cross beyond the maya. They cross
beyond the world of maya which is the source of delusion.
R. makes out that maya is that which is capable of producing
marvellous effects.

The State of Evildoers
15. na mam duskrtino miidhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayaya ’pahriajnana

asuram bhavam asritah
(15) The Evil doers who are foolish, low in the human scale,
whose minds are carried away by illusion and who partake
of the nature of demons do not seek refuge in Me.

The evil doers cannot attain to the Supreme, for their mind and
will are not instruments of the Spirit but of the ego. They do not
seek to master their crude impulses but are a prey to the rajas
and tamas in them. If we control them by the sattva in us, our
action becomes ordered and enlightened and ceases to be the
result of passion and ignorance. To get beyond the three gunas,
we have to attain first the rule of sattva. We have to become
ethical, before we can become spiritual. At the spiritual level, we
cross the dualities and act in the light and strength of the Spirit
in us, We do not act then to gain any personal interest or avoid
personal suffering but only as the instrument of the Divine.

Different Kinds of Devotion

16 caturvidhé bhajante mam
janah sukrtino 'rjuna
Grto jijhasur artharthi
jhani ca bharatarsabha

« alaukiki atyadbhuteti Sridhara.
2 devasya jivarapena lilaya kridato mama sambandhiniyar daivi
Nilakantha,

3 mayan sarvabhidamohinir taranti, sams@rabandhand, mu-
cyante. §.°VII. God and the World 2g

(16) The virtuous ones who worship Me are of four kinds,
the man in distress, the seeker for knowledge, the seeker for
wealth and the man of wisdom, O Lord of the Bharatas
(Arjuna).

sukrtinah: virtuous ones. Those who are disposed towards the
higher life on’account of their past virtuous conduct.

The afflicted, those in distress, who have suffered losses are
one class. Those who are desirous of wealth, dhanakama (S.), who
wish to improve their material position are another. The third
group are devout and upright and wish to know the truth. They
are on the right way. The fourth are the jfianis, they who know.
R. interprets jfiana or wisdom as devotion to one alone, ekabhakti.

MB. speaks of four classes of devotees of whom three are
phalakamah or those desirous of rewards while the best are single-
minded worshippers.* Others ask for favours, but the sage asks
nothing and refuses nothing. He yields himself completely to the
Divine, accepting whatever is given to him. His attitude is one of
self-oblivious non-utilitarian worship of God for His own sake.

17. tesdm jnani nityayukta
ehabhaktir visisyate
priyo hi jianino ’tyartham
aham sa ca mama priyah
(17) Of these the wise one, who is ever in constant union
with the Divine, whose devotion is single-minded, is the best.
For I am supremely dear to him and he is dear to Me.

So long as we are seekers, we are still in the world of duality
but when we have attained wisdom, there is no duality. The sage
unites himself with the One Self in all.

18. udarah sarva evai 'te
nani tv dtmai "va me matam
Gsthitah sa hi yuktatna
mam eva nuitamam gatim

 

} piirvajanmasu ye krtapunyd janah. Sridhara.
2 caturvidhd mama jana bhakia evan hi me srutam
tesdm ehantinah srestha ye caiva nadnyadevatah.
aintiparva, 341, 33-30 The Bhagavadgita

(x8) Noble indeed are all these but the sage, I hold, is verily
Myself. For being perfectly harmonized. he resorts to Me
alone as the highest goal.

udarah sarva evai'te: noble indeed are all these. We pray to
avoid emotional suffering (artah), gain practical advantages
(artharthi), obtain intellectual satisfaction (jijfiisuh) or gain
wisdom (jfidni). All these are noble. Even if we pray for material
things, turn prayer into a formal routine or use it as a mascot,
we recognize the reality of the religious sense. Prayer is the effort
of man to reach God. It assumes that there is an answering
Presence in the world. If we ask, it shall be given to us. Through
the exercise of prayer, we kindle a light in our consciousness
which shows up our silly pride, our selfish greed, our fears and
hopes. It is a means for the building up of an integral personality,
a harmony of body, mind and spirit. Slowly we feel that it is
degrading to pray for luck in life or success in examinations. We
pray that we may know the Divine and be more and more like
Him. Prayer is a way of life. Slowly it becomes the practice of
the presence of God. It is jiiana, integral wisdom, divine
life. The jfiani who knows God as He is, loves God for what
He is. He lives in the Divine. God is dear to him as he is
dear to God. While the first three types attempt to use God
according to their ideas, the knowers belong to God to be
used according to His will. Therefore they are the best of them
all. It is possible that, when we are in deep distress, we may
pray with such, single-heartedness and intensity, to be relieved
of our agony. If such a prayer be answered, it may be thwarting
the purpose of God which we are unable to see in our blindness.
The jfidni, however, has the purity of heart and singleness of will
to see the plan of God and ask for its realization. “Thy will,
not mine, be done.”

19. bahiinam janmanam ante
jiidnavin mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam ttt
sa mahdimda sudurlabhah

(tg) At the end of many lives, the man of wisdom resorts
to Me, knowing that Vasudeva (the Supreme) is all that is.
*Such a great soul is very difficult to find.VII. God and the World 221

bahiindmn janmandm ante: at the end of many lives. The realiza-
tion of the truth is a work of ages. One cannot expect to obtain
the reward until one has sounded well the depths of experience
in its varied complexity, and all this takes time. God lets the
plant grow at its own pace. It takes nine months to make a
natural baby and it will take a much longer time to make a
spiritual one. The total transformation of nature is a long process.

vasudevah sarvam: Vasudeva is all. Vasudeva is the lord of the
life which dwells in all.t God is all in virtue of His two natures.

R. means by this phrase that ‘Vasudeva is my all.” It refers
to God's imperishable majesty felt by the devotee who is humble
and trustful. God is all while we are nothing. Like everything
else, man cannot exist without God also existing at the same time.
We trustfully resign ourselves to His hands confessing that He
is all. It is a consciousness of humility towards God who is every-
thing and who truly is.

“Vasudeva is the cause of all.” Madhva.

Other forms of entreaty ahd prayer are not without their value.
They have their reward.

Toleration

20. kimais tais-tair hrtajianah
prapadyante 'nyadevatah
tam-tam niyamam asthaya
prakytya niyatah svaya
(20) But those whose minds are distorted by desires resor!
to other gods, observing various rites, constrained by their
own natures

21. yo-yo yan-yam tanum bhaktah
Sraddhaya ’rcitum icchati
tasya-tasya ’calim Sraddham
tam eva vidadhamy aham
(21) Whatever form any devotee with faith wishes to wor-
ship, I make that faith of his steady.
The Supreme Lord confirms the faith of each and grants the
rewards each seeks. Exactly as far as the soul has risen in its

* vasati sarvasminn itt vasub, tasya devah,222 The Bhagavadgita

struggle does God stoop to meet it. Even seers who were so
profoundly contemplative as Gautama the Buddha and S. did
not repudiate the popular belief in gods. They were conscious
of the inexpressibility of the Supreme Godhead as well as the
infinite number of possible manifestations. Every surface derives
its soil from the depths even as every shadow reflects the nature
of the substance. Besides, all worship elevates. No matter what
we revere, so long as our reverence is serious, it helps progress.

22 sa tayd Sraddhaya yuktas
tasya ’radhanam thate
lathate ca tatah kiman
muayai va vihitan hi tan
(22) Endowed with that faith, he seeks the propitiation of such
a one and from him he obtains his desires, the benefits
being decreed by Me alone.
All forms are forms of the One Supreme; their worship 1s the
worship of the Supreme; the giver of all rewards is the Supreme.t
Sridhara.

 

23 antavat tu phalam tesam
tad bhavaty alpamedhasam
devan devayajo yanti
madbhakta yanti mam api

(23) But temporary is the fruit gained by these men of
small minds. The worshippers of the gods go to the gods
but My devotees come to Me.

As the Transcendent Divine cannot be known easily we resort
to aspects of the Supreme and offer our worship. We realize the
results we seek, for the Supreme is patient with our imperfect
vision. He accepts our prayers and answers them at the level at
which we approach Him. No devotion is worihless. Gradually
even the illiterate devotee will seek his highest good in the Divine
and grow into it. Those who rise to the worship of the Transcen-
dent Godhead which embraces and transcends all aspects realize
and attain to the highest state, integral in being, perfect in know-

' sarva api devata mamaiva miirtayah, taddvadhanam api vastuto
mamaradhanam eva, tat tat phaladatapi ca’hameva,VII. God and the World 223

ledge, absolute in love and complete in will. All other goods are
partial and limited and have a meaning only at lower levels of
development.

The Power of Ignorance

24. avyaktam vyaktim apannam
manyante mam abuddhayah
param bhavam ajananto
mama 'vyayam anuttamam

(24) Men of no understanding think of Me, the unmanifest,
as having manifestation, not knowing My higher nature,
changeless and supreme.

The forms we impose on the Formless are due to our limitations.
We turn away from the contemplation of Ultimate Reality to
concentrate upon imaginative reconstructions. All gods except
the One Unmanifest Eternal are forms imposed on Him. God is
not one among many. He is the One behind the ever changing
many, who stands beyond all forms, the immutable centre of
endless mobility.

25. na *ham prakasah sarvasya
yogamayasamavytah
midho ’yam na *bhijanati
loko mim ajam avyayam
(25) Veiled by My creative power (yogamaya) I am not
revealed to all. This yewildered world knows Me not, the
unborn, the unchanging.

yoga: S, means by it union of the three gunas: for Madhusiidana
it is sarhkalpa or will. .

The Supreme is not only in the world but beyond it. We mistake
Him for this or that limited form.

Cp. Bhagavata: “O Lord, All pervading Supreme Self, Lord
of Yoga, who is there in the three worlds, who can penetrate
Thy mystery, know where, when, in what manner and in how
many forms Thou engagest Thyself in sport ?”’: Only Pure Being

» ho vetti bhiiman bhagavan paratman yogesvarotir bhavatas trilokyam

kva vd hatharh va hati va hadeti vistarayan hrigasi yogamayam.224 The Bhagavadgita
is unmanifest, everything else belongs to the world of manifes-
tation.
26. vedd "ham samatiiani
vartamananéi ca ’rjuna
bhavisyani ca bhiiténi

mam tu veda na kascana
(26) I know the beings that are past, that are present
O Arjuna, and that are to come but Me no one knows.

27. tcchadvesasamutthena
dvandvamohena bhavata
sarvabhiitani sarimoham
sarge yanti paramtapa
(27) All beings are born to delusion O Bharata (Arjuna)
overcome by the dualities which arise from wish and hate,
O Conqueror of the foe (Arjuna).

The Object of Knowledge

28. yesam tv antagatarh papam
jananam punyakarmanam
te dvandvamohanirmukia
bhajante mam drdhavratah
(28) But those men of virtuous deeds in whom sin has come
to an end (who have died to sin), freed from the delusion of
dualities, worship Me steadfast in their vows.

Sin is not the violation of a law ora convention but the central
source of all finiteness, ignorance, the assertion of the indepen-
dence of the ego which seeks its own private gain at the expense
of others. When this sin is renounced, when this ignorance is
overcome, our life is spent in the service of the One in all. In the
process, devotion deepens and knowledge of God increases until
it reaches the vision of the One Self everywhere. That is the life
eternal, release from birth and death. Tukaram says:

“The self within me now is dead
And thou enthroned in its stead
Yea, this I, Tuka, testify,
No longer now is ‘me’ or ‘my’.”"
* Macnicol: Psaims of the Maratha Saints (1919). p79.VII. God and the World 225

29 jaramaranamoksiya
mam aSsritya yatanti ye
te brahma tad viduk krisnam
adhydtmam karma ca ’khilam

(29) Those who take refuge in Me and strive for deliverance
from old age and death, they know the Brahman (or Absolute)
entire (they know) the Self and all about action

adhydtmam is the reality underlying the individual self.

30 sadhibhittadhidaivam mam
sadhiyajham ca ye viduh
prayanakale 'pi ca mam
te vidur yuktacetasah
(30) Those who know Me as the One that governs the
material and the divine aspects, and all sacrifices, they,
with their minds harmonized, have knowledge of Me even
at the time of their departure (from here)

We are not asked to remember at the time of departure certain
speculative doctrines, but to know Him in all aspects, trust Him
and worship Him.

Certain new terms are used and Arjuna in the next chapter
asks for their explanations. The Supreme is to be known not only
inItself but also in Its manifestations in nature, in objective and
subjective phenomena, in the principle of works and sacrifice.
‘The teacher explains them all briefly in the next chapter.

thi... jidnajiinayogo nima saptamo ‘dhydyah

This is the seventh chapter entitled The Yoga o! Wisdom
and Knowledge.

4 pratyagaimaviyayam vastu, S,CHAPTER VIII

The Course of Cosmic Evolution

Arjuna Questions

arjuna uvaca
1. hit tad brahma kim adhydtmanh
hirit harma puruso‘tiama
adhibhitam ca kim proktam
adhidaivan kim ucyate

Arjuna said:

(1) What is Brahman (or the Absolute)? What is the Self
and what is action, O the Best of persons? What is said to
be the domain of the elements? What is called the domain
of the gods?

What is present in the self (adhyatmam)? What is present in
the gods (adhidaivam)? What is present in the sacrifice (adhiya-
jfiam)? What is present in all beings (adhibhiitam)? The answer
to these questions is that the Supreme Spirit pervades all created
beings, all sacrifices, all deities and all work. These are only the
varied expressions of the Supreme.t

2. adhiyajhah katharh ko ’tra
dehe’ min madhusiidan i
prayanakéle ca katharh
jieyo ’si niyatatmabhih
(2) What is the domain (part) of sacrifice in this body and how,
O Madhusidana (Krsna). How again art Thou to be known
at the time of departure by the self-controlled?

How art Thou revealed at the hour of death to the spiritual-
minded?

* mamaiva ripantarini. Abhinavagupte.VILL. The Course of Cosmic Evolution 227
Krsna Answers

Sribhagavan uvaca
3. aksarant brahma paramarh
svabhavo ‘dhyatmam ucvate
bhittabhavodbhavakaro
visargah karmasamjiitah

The Blessed Lord said:
(3) Brahman (or the Absolute) is the indestructible, the
Supreme (higher than all else), essential nature is called the
Self Karma is the name given to the creative force that
brings beings into existence

svabha@va: Brahman assumes the form of jiva, Chap. XV, 7.1

adhyitma: the lord of the body, the enjoyer.? It is the phase
of the Divine which constitutes the individual self.

Brahman is the immutable self-existence on which all that
lives, moves and has its being rests. Self is the spirit in man and
nature. Karma is the creative impulse out of which life’s forms
issue. The whole cosmic evolution is called karma. The Supreme
undertakes it and there is no reason why the individual jiva
should not take part in it. The Immutable which is above all
dualities of subject and object, becomes, from the cosmic end,
the eternal subject, adhyatma, facing the eternal object which is
mutable in nature, prakrti, the receptacle of all forms, while
karma is the creative force, the principle of movement. All these
are not independent but are the manifestations of the One
Supreme. The subject-object interaction which is the central
pattern of the cosmos is the expression of Brahman, the Absolute
Spirit which is above the distinctions of subject and object.

Mandakya Up. affirms that whilé the Absolute is indescribable,
qualitvless,3 the living God is the ruler of the world, the in-

\ svasya eva brahmana eva avnéataya jfivaripena. bhavanarh
svabhdvah. Sridhara.

2 sa eva Gtindnam deham adhtkrtya bhoRtytvena vartamano'dhyatma-
Sabdena ucyate. Sridhara.

3 adystam, avyavaharyam, agrahyam, alaksanam, acintyam, avya-
padesyam, ehatmapratyayasaram, praparcopasamam, sartam, Sivam,
advaitam. 7228 The Bhagavadgita

dwelling soul." The distinction between Godhead and God, the
Absolute and the Personal God, Brahman and [kvara, is clearly
enunciated in this Upanisad. The personal God is the cosmic
Lord, while Brahman is the supra-cosmic reality.

4. adhibhiitan: ksaro bhavah
purusas ca 'dhidaivatam
adhiyajiio ‘ham eva ’tra
dehe dehabhrtam vara

(4) The basis of all created things is the mutable nature:
the basis of the divine elements is the cosmic spirit. And
the basis of all sacrifices, here in the body is Myself, O Best
of embodied beings (Arjuna).

Here again the author wishes us to possess an integral know-
ledge of the Divine in all aspects. There is the Immutable Divine,
Brahman; there is the Personal God Iévara, the object of all
devotion; there is the Cosmic Self, Hiranyagarbha the presiding
deity of the cosmos, and the jiva the individual soul which
partakes of the higher nature of the Divine and prakrti the
mutable nature. See VII, 4 ff.

The Soul goes to that on which it is set at the Moment of
Dissolution

5. antakdle ca mam eva
smaran muktvd kalevavam
yah prayati sa madbhévam
vati na ’sty atra sarnsayah
(5) And whoever, at the time of death, gives up his. body
and departs, thinking of Me alone, he comes to My status
(of being) ; of that there is no doubt.

This verse takes up the point raised in VII, 30. The importance
of the state of mind at the moment of death is emphasized in
the Upanisads. Chandogya, IIT, 14, 1; Pragna, III, 10. We will
think of God in the last moments only if we are devoted to Him
previously also.

1 esa sarvesvara esa sarvajha, eso'antarydmi yesa yonih sarvasya
prabhavapvayau hi bhiitindm. 6.VIII. The Course of Cosmic Evolution 229

6. yam-yam va "pi smaran Lhavart
tyajaty ante kalevarant
tam-tam evai ‘ti kaunteya
sada tadbhdvabhavitah

(6) Thinking of whatever state (of being) he at the end gives
up his body, to that being does he attain, O Son of Kunti
(Arjuna), being ever absorbed in the thought thereof

sada tad bhava bhavitah: ever absorbed in the thought thereof.

It is not the casual fancy of the last moment but the persistent
endeavour of the whole life that determines the future.

tadbhavabhavitah: literally, made to become (bhavila) in the con-
dition (bhava) of that.

The soul goes to that on which its mind is set during the last
moments. What we think we become. Our past thoughts deter-
mine our present birth and our present ones will determine the
future,

7. tasmat sarvesu kalesu
man anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpitamanobuddhir
mam evai ’syasy asamsayah

(7) Therefore at all times remember Me and fight When
thy mind and understanding are set on Me to Me alone shalt
thou come without doubt

sarvesu kdlesu: at all times. Only then shall we be able to
remember God in the critical last moments. Sridhara.

mdm anusmara yudhya: remember Me and fight. It is not fight
on the material plane that is intended here for it cannot be done
at all times. It is the fight with the powers of darkness that we
have to carry on perpetually.

We must engage in the work of the world retaining our con-
sciousness of Eternity, the brooding presence of the Unchanging
God. ‘Just as a dancing girl fixes her attention on the waterpot
she bears on her head even when she is dancing to various tunes,
so also a truly pious man does not give up (his attention) to the
blissful feet of the Supreme Lord even when he attends to his230 The Bhagavadgita

many concerns.” All actions of our lives are to be surrendered
to God who encloses, penetrates and gives meaning to our lives.
The mere remembrance of God purifies all work. Cp. “I bow to
the Infallible. By thinking of Him or calling on His name, every
defect in austerities, sacrifice and ritual is removed.”

8. abhydsayogayuktena
cetasa na ’nyagaminad
paramam purusam divyam
yati parthé nucintayan

(8) He who meditates on the Supreme Person with his
thought attuned by constant practice and not wandering
after anything else, he, O Partha (Arjuna), reaches the
Person, Supreme and Divine.

It is not death-bed repentance that will save us but constant
practice and unwavering dedication to the Supreme.

9. Ravim puranam anuSasitavam
anor aniyamsam anusmared yah
sarvasya dhataram acintyariipam
Gdityavarnam tamasah parastat

(9) He who meditates on the Seer, the ancient, the ruler,
subtler than the subtle, the supporter of all, whose form is
beyond conception, who is suncoloured beyond the darkness

See Svetasvatara Up., III, 18.

Ravi: seer. It is taken to mean omniscient.3

Here is a description not of the relationless, immutable Abso-
lute but of Igvara, the Personal God, Seer, Creator and Ruler of
the cosmos. He is the light opposed to darkness.4

* punkhanupunkhavisayan upasevamano
dhivo na mufcati mukundapadaravindam
sargita-vadya-laya-tdlavasamgatapi
maulistha kumbha pariraskana dhir nativa,
2 yasya smrtyd ca ndmohtya tapoyajnaknyadisn
‘nyiinam sampirnatim yati sadyo vande tam acyutam.
3 Ravin krantadarsinam sarvaziam. §,
4 prakdsariipatuena tamovirodinam. Madhitsudana.VIII. The Course of Cosmc Evolution 231

10. prayanakdle manasa ’calena
bhaktya yukto yogabalena cat 'va
bhruvor madhye pranam avesya samyak
1 sa tam param purusam upaiti divyam
(10) He who does so, at the time of his departure, with a
steady mind, devotion and strength of yoga and setting
well his life force in the centre of the eyebrows, he attains
to this Supreme Divine Person.
Apparently this practice-is possible only for those who choose
the moment of death by the power of yoga.

11. yad aksavam vedavido vadanti
visanti yad yatayo vitaragah
yada icchanto brahmacaryam caranti
tat te padam samgrahena pravaksye

(r1) I shall briefly describe to thee that state which the
knowers of the Veda call the Imperishable, which ascetics
freed from passion enter and desiring which they lead a
life of self-control.

See Katha Up., II, 15. “The word which all the Vedas rehearse,
and which all austerities proclaim, desiring which men live the
life of religious studentship—that word to thee I briefly declare.”
Theists look upon it as the highest heaven “‘the highest place of
Visnu.” visnok paramam padam.

12. sarvadvaram samyamya
mano hydi nirudhya ca
miirdhny adhiya ’tmanah pranam
Csthito yogadh -ranam
(12) All the gates of the body restrained, the mind confined
within the heart, one’s life force fixed in the head, established
in concentration by yoga
The body is called the ninegated city: V, 13. The mind which
is confined within the heart means the mind whose functions are
checked. The yoga Sastra tells us that the soul which passes from
the heart through susumnanadi to the brahmarandhra in the
head and thence goes out, becomes one with the Supreme.
* yogenante tanu tyajam. Kalidasa: Raghuvarisa. 1, 8.232 The Bhagavadgita

13. aum ity ekdksaram brahma
vyaharan mam cnusmaran
yah prayati tyajan deham
Sa yati pavamam gatim
(13) He who utters the single syllable Aum (which is)
Brahman, remembering Me as he departs, giving up his
body, he goes to the highest goal.

Aum stands for the inexpressible Absolute.

‘mam anusmaran: remembering Me. The highest state can be
obtained through the worship of God, according to the Yoga
Siliva.t

14. ananyacetah satatam
yo mam smarati nityasah
tasya ’ham sulabhah partha
mityayuktasya yoginak
(x4) He who constantly meditates on Me, thinking of none
else, by him who is a yogin ever disciplined (or united witl
the Supreme), I am easily reached

15. mim upetya punarjanma
duhkhalayam asasvatam
napnuvanti mahatmanah
sansiddhim paramam gatah
(15) Having come to Me, these great souls do not get back
to rebirth, the place of sorrow, impermanent, for they have
reached the highest perfection.
See note on IX, 33.

16. & brahmabhuvandl lokah
punarévartino 'rjuna
mam upetya tu kaunteya
punarjanma na vidyate
(16) From the realm of Brahma downwards, all worlds are
subject to return to rebirth, but on reaching Me, O Son of
Kunti (Arjuna), there is no return to birth again.
All the worlds are subject to change.

¥ samadhisiddhir ivarapranidhanat.
2 punardvartinah kalaparicchinnatedt, $,VIII. The Course of Cosmic Evolution 233,

17. sahasrayugaparyantam
ahar yad brahmano viduh
ratrim yugasahasrantam
te "horatravido janah

(17) Those who know that the day of Brahma is of the
duration of a thousand ages and that the night (of Brahmi) is
a thousand ages long, they are the knowers of day and night.
Day is the period of cosmic manifestation and night of non-

manifestation. These are of equal length of time and alternate.

 

18. avyaktid vyaktayah sarvah
prabhavanty aharagame
ratryagame praliyante
tatrai ’va ’vyaktasamjphake
(18) At the coming of day, all manifested things come forth
from the unmanifested and at the coming of night they
merge in that same, called the unmanifested.
Here the unmanifested is prakrti.

19. bhiitagramah sa cva ‘yam
bhiitva-bhiitva praliyate
ratryagame ’vasah partha
prabhavaty aharagame

(z9) This very same multitude of existences arising again
and again merges helplessly at the coming of night, O
Partha (Arjuna), and streams forth into being at the coming
of day

This periodic emergence and dissolution of all existences does
not affect the Lord of all existences.

20. paras tasmat tu bhavo ’nyo
*vyakto ’vyaktat sandtanak
yah sa sarvesu bhiitesu
naSyatsi na vinasyati

(20) But beyond this unmanifested, there is yet another
Unmanifested Eternal Being who does not perish even
when all existences perish.234 The Bhagavadgita

It is the Supracosmic Unmanifested which is changeless and
eternal, in the midst of all changes. Two types of unmanifested
are sometimes distinguished, an unmanifested (avyakta), into
which all unredeemed beings enter, and the supercosmic avyakta,
called also Suddhatattva which is imperceptible to the ordinary
mind into which the redeemed souls enter. The perpetual rhythm
of day and night is on all cosmic beings which cannot last for
ever. Beyond the cosmic process is the Supreme Unmanifested
Brahman, the highest goal. Those who attain It pass beyond day
and night.

21. avyakto ’ksara ity uktas
tam Ghuh paramam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante
tad dhama paraman mama

(21) This Unmanifested is called the Imperishable. Him they
speak of as the Supreme Status. Those who attain to Him
return not. That is My supreme abode.

We escape from the cycle of birth and death or cosmic manr
festation (prabhava) and non-manifestation (pralaya). Even to
reach the status of the Indefinable Absolute whose status goes
beyond the cosmic manifestation, we have to offer our whole
personality to the Supreme. Even the supracosmic condition of
the Eternally Unmanifest can be won through bhakti or devotion
By union with Him of our whole conscious being, we reach
the perfect consummation. The supreme abode of the personal
God, Igvara, is Parabrahma, the Absolute: see also VIII, 2.

22. purusah sa parah partha
bhaktya labhyas tv ananyaya
yasya 'ntahsthani bhitani
yena sarvam idam tatam

(22) This is the Supreme Person, O Partha (Arjuna),
in whom all existences abide and by whom all this is
pervaded (who) can, however, be gained by unswerving
devotion.VIII. The Course of Cosmic Evolution 235
The Two Ways

23. yatra kale tv anaurttim
dvrttim cai "va yoginah
prayaté yanti tam kalam
vaksyami bharatarsabha
(23) Now I shall declare to thee, O Best of Bharatas (Arjuna),
the time in which yogins departing, never return and also
that wherein departing they return.

24. agnir jyotir ahah suklah
saumasa utiarayanam
tatra prayata gacchanti
brahma brahmavido janah

(24) Fire, light, day, the bright (half of the month), the six
months of the northern path (of the Sun), then going forth
the men who know the Absolute go to the Absolute.

25. dhiimo ratris tatha krsnah
sanmasa daksiniyanam
tatra cindramasam jyotir
yogi prapya nivartate
(25) Smoke, night, so also the dark (half of the month), the
six months of the southern part (of the Sun), then going
forth, the yogi obtains the lunar light and returns.
Our dead ancestors (pitrs) are said to live in the world of the
moon and remain there till the time of their return to earth.

26. Suklakrsne gatt hy ete
jagatah sasvate mate
ehaya yaty andurltim
anyaya ’vartate punah
(26) Light and darkness, these paths are thought to be the
world’s ev rlasting (paths). By the one he goes not to return,
by the other he returns again.
Life is a conflict between light and darkness. The former makes
for release and the latter for rebirth. The author here uses an old236 The Bhagavadgita

eschatological belief to illustrate a great spiritual truth, that those
who are lost in the night of ignorance go by the path of ancestors
and are subject to rebirth and those who live in the day of illu-
mination and tread the path of knowledge obtain release from
rebirth.

27. nai ’te srtt partha janan
yogi muhyati kaScana
tasmat sarvesu kdlesu
yogayukto bhava 'rjuna

(27) The yogin who knows these paths, O Partha (Arjuna),
is never deluded. Therefore, at all times, O Arjuna, be thou
firm in yoga.

Whatever work you undertake, do not lose the thought of the
Eternal.

28. vedesu yajhesu tapahsu cai ’va
danesu yat punyaphalam pradistam
atyeti tat sarvam idam viditva
yogt param sthinam upaiti ca ‘dyam
(28) The yogin having known all this, goes beyond the fruits
of meritorious deeds assigned to the study of the Vedas,
sacrifices, austerities and gifts and attains to the supreme
and primal status.

The states which result from the study of the Vedas, sacrifices
austerities and gifts are all lower stages to be passed over by the
Yogi who soars beyond them to the final goal.

ity... aksarabrahmayogo nama ’stamo ‘dhydyah

This is the eighth chapter entitled The Yoga of the
Imperishable Absolute.CHAPTER IX
The Lord is more than His Creation

The Sovereign Mystery
Sribhagavan uvaca
1. idam tu te guhyatamam
pravaksyamy anasiivave
jhanam vijidnasahitam
vaj jiatua moksyase 'Sulhat
The Blessed Lord said:
(x) To Thee, who dost not cavil, I shall declare this pro-
found secret of wisdom combined with knowledge, by
knowing which thou shalt be released from evil.
vijnanasahitam, anubhavayuktam. S. We take jiiana, however,

as meaning wisdom and vijfiana as detailed knowledge. If the
former is metaphysical truth, the latter is scientific knowledge.
We have at our disposal these different and complementary means
of obtaining truth, an intuitive as well as an intellectual expan-
sion of the human mind. We must acquire wisdom and knowledge,
penetration of reality and a profound grasp of the nature of
things. The philosophers prove that God exists but their know-
edge of God is indirect; the seers proclaim that they have felt
the reality of God in the depths of their soul and their knowledge
is direct.t See III, 41; VI, 8.

2. rajavidya rajaguhyam
pavitram idam uttamam
pratyaksavagamam dharmyar
susukham kartum avyayam
(2) This is sovereign knowledge, sovereign secret, supreme
sanctity, known by direct experience, in accord with the
law, very easy to practise and imperishable.
rajavidyd, rajagnhyam , literally king-knowledge, king-secret,
the greatest wisdom, the greatest secret.

+ asts brahmeti ced veda paroksams fiidnam eva tat
aham (or asmi) brahmeti ced veda aparoksam tad ucyate.238 The Bhagavadgita

pratyaksavagamam, It is not a matter for argument but is
verified by direct experience. It is knowledge by acquaintance
and not by description, hearsay or report. The truth is there
shining by its own light, waiting to be seen by us, if the obstruct-
ing veils are removed. The Supreme is to be seen by one as one’s
own self, through one’s developed and purified intuition.t Cp.
pratibodhaviditam.

Kena Up., Il, 12.

3. aSvaddadhanah purusa
dharmasya ’sya paramtapa
aprapya mam nivartante
mytyusamsaravartmani
(3) Men who have no faith in this way, not attaining to Me,
O Oppressor of the foe (Arjuna), return to the path of
mortal living (satnsara).

The sovereign knowledge is the identity of Krsna, the Incarnate
Lord, with Brahman the source of all. Final illumination will
dawn on us if we worship the Incarnate with this knowledge. The
direct contemplation of the Absolute is more difficult. Because
Arjuna is a man of faith, he is taught this secret. The faithless
who do not accept it, do not gain release but return to birth again.
The faith demanded is the faith in the reality of saving wisdom
and man’s capacity to attain it. The first step to grow into the
freedom of the Divine is faith in the Godhead in us, which supports
our being and action. When we surrender ourselves to that inner
Divine, the practice of yoga becomes easy.

4. maya tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyaktamirtina
matsthani sarvabhiutani
na cé’ ham tesv avasthitah

The Incarnate Lord as the Supreme Reality
(4) By Me all this universe is pervaded through My un-
manifested form. All beings abide in Me but I do not abide
in them.
' na SAstrair ndpi gurund dysyate paramesvarah
drSyate svatmanatvatma svaya sattvasthaya dhiyd.
Yogavasistha VI, 118, 4.IX. The Lord is More Than His Creation 239

See VII, 12.

This whole universe owes its being to the Transcendent Godhead
and yet the forms of this universe do not contain or express Him
adequately. His absolute reality is far above the appearance of
things in space and time.

5. na ca matsthani bhitant
pasya me yogam aisvaram
Uhiitabhrn na ca bhitas'ho
mama ’tma bhiitabhavanah

(5) And (yet) the beings do not dwell in Me; behold My
divine mystery. My spirit which is the source of all beings
sustains the beings but does not abide in them.

yogam aisvaram: divine mystery. The explanation of the rise
of the limited phenomenal universe out of the Absolute Godhead
is traced to the power of the Divine. The Supreme is the source
of all phenomena but is not touched by them. That is the yoga
of divine power. Though He creates existences, God transcends
them to such a degree that we cannot even say that He dwells
in them. Even the idea of immanence of God is, strictly speaking,
untenable. All existences are due to His double nature but as
His higher proper nature is Atman which is unconnected with the
work of prakrti, it is also true that beings do not dwell in Him
nor He in them. They are one and yet separate.

“The jiva or the embodied self, bearing the body and main-
taining it, remains clinging to it by aharhkara or self-sense. Unlike
the jiva, I, though bearing and maintaining all beings, do not
remain in them, since I am free from ahamkdara or self-sense.”
Sridhara.

The Gita does not deny the world, which exists through God
and has God behind, above and before it. It exists through
Him who, without the world, would yet be in Himself no less
what He is. Unlike God, the world does not possess its specific
existence in itself. It has therefore only limited and not absolute
being. The teacher inclines not to pantheism which asserts that
everything is God but to panentheism that denotes that every-
thing subsists in God. The cosmic process is not a complete mani-
festation of the Absolute. No finite process can ever finally and240 The Bhagavadgita

fully express the Absolute, though this world is a living mani-
festation of God.

6. ya'ha kaSasthito ni'yar
vayuh sarvatrago mahin
atha sarvani bhitant
matsthani 'ty upadharaya

(6) As the mighty air, moving everywhere, ever abides in the
etheric space (4kasa), know thou that in the same manner
all existences abide in Me.

Space holds them all but is touched by none.

The teacher gives here an analogy. The space is the true
universal, all-pervading infinite background on which aerial
phenomena take place, but its nature is stable and immutable.
So also the Infinite Self is one, not many. Though it is immutable
being, it is the support of all that moves. It is not con-
tained in any of the moving entities which are all ultimately
dependent on the Self. And yet the Self supports the many. Air
exists in space but it does not consist of space and has nothing
essentially in common with it. It is only in such a sense that we
can say things exist in God.

God’s utter transcendence, which is later developed by Madhva,
comes out here. Even in R.’s account, the universe is the mani-
festation of the Divine; but in this verse it is said, that, while
God causes things to exist, He does not exist in them. They are
there on account of His wondrous power. God so completely
transcends the universe that He is separated from all worldly
being and is opposed to it as the “wholly other.” This is the
expression of a profound religious intuition.

7. sarvabhit’ani kaunteya
prakytin yanti maniikém
kalpaksaye punas tant
kalpadau visyjamy aham
{7) All beings, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), pass into nature

which is My own at the end of the cycle; and at the
beginning of the (next) cycle, I send them forth.1X. The Lord is More Than His Creation 241

8. prakrtivn svam avastabhya
visrjami punah-punah
bhittagramam imar hytsnam
avasamt prakrier vasat

(8) Taking hold of nature which is My own, I send forth
again and again all this multitude of beings which are
helpless, being under the control of nature (prakrti).

The unmanifested nature when lit up by the Unmanifested Self
produces the objective universe with its different planes. The
order and nature of development are determined by the seeds
contained in nature. Only the Divine Self must take hold ot it.

The ego is subject to the law of karma and is therefore helplessly
obliged to take embodiment in the cosmic hfe. In IV, 6, it is said

that the Divine assumes birth through His own mi almama-
yaya. Human souls are not lords of their action. While they are
subject to nature, the Supreme controls nature and is not help-
lessly driven by prakrt: through ignorance. In both cases, the
means of creation is maya. In the divine embodiment, it is
yogamaya, itmamaya, prakrti which is filled with the light and
joy of the Supreme and acts under His control. In human
embodiment, it is avidya maya. The human soul 1s entangled
in ignorance and is helplessly bound in its work. through its
subjection to prakrti.

 

y. nacamam tam karmane
nibadhnanti dhanamjaya
udasinavad asinam
asaktam tesu karmasu

(9) Nor do these works bind Me, O winner of wealth (Arjuna),
for I am seated as if indifferent, unattached in those actions.

Though the Supreme controls creation and dissolution, as their
spirit and guide, He is not involved in them tor He is above the
procession of cosmic events. As it is the work of the nature which
belongs to God, He is to b> regarded as immanent in it, and yet
in His supracosmic side, He exceeds the cosmic series of things
and events. God is thus unweariedly active in the play of the
universe and yet above the universe and free from its laws. The
Self is not bound by the cosmic wheel which it projects. Countless.242 The Bhagavadgita

individuals are born, grow, strive and suffer, die and come to birth
again but the Self is for ever free. They reap the fruits of their
actions and are bound by their past acts but He is ever free.
This evolution proceeds at the cosmic dawn and is withdrawn
at the cosmic night.

10 maya ’dhyaksena prakytib
Siiyate sacaracaram
hetuna nena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate

(x0) Under My guidance, nature (prakrti) gives birth to all
things, moving and unmoving and by this means, O Son of
Kunti (Arjuna), the world revolves.

Krsna is here represented as the Supreme Self who pervades
the universe, who supports all beings and yet is transcendent and
unaffected. Anandagiri advises that we should not raise the
question of the purpose of creation. ‘“We cannot say that it is
meant for the enjoyment of the Supreme; for the Supreme really
enjoys nothing. It is a pure consciousness, a mere witness. And
there is no other enjoyer for there is no other conscious entity
. .. nor is creation intended to secure moksa for it is opposed
to moksa. Thus neither the question nor an answer to it is pos-
sible and there is no occasion for it, as creation is due to the
maya of the Supreme.” Cp. tg. Veda: “Who could perceive (it)
directly, and who could declare whence born and why this
variegated creation?”

Devotion to the Supreme brings its great reward: lesser
devotions bring lesser rewards

Il. avajanant mam miigha
manusim tanum asritam

param bhavam ajananto
mama bhiitamahesvaram

(xx) The deluded despise Me clad in human body, not
knowing My higher nature as Lord of all existences

1 ho addha veda ka tha pravocat kuta Gjata, huta iyarm visrstib.
X, 129, 6; Taittitya Brahmana, I, 8, 9.IX. The Lord is More Than His Creation 243

We see only the outward human body and not the Divine in
it. We see the outer appearance, not the inner reality. To recog-
nize God in His earthly disguise means effort. Unless we turn
cur entire existence towards the Eternal, transcending the limits
of phenomenal nature and recover the greater consciousness
by which we can live in the Divine, we will be a prey to finite
fascinations.

Image worship is to be used as a means to the Divine; other-
wise it is faulty. In the Bhagavata the Lord is represented as
saying “I am present in all beings as their soul but disregarding
My presence, the mortal makes a display of image worship.’ ’:

12. moghasa moghakarméino
moghajfiand vicetasah
raksasim adsurim cai 'va
prakrtim mohinim sritah
(12) Partaking of the deceptive nature of fiends and demons,
their aspirations are vain, their actions vain and their
knowledge vain and they are devoid of judgment.

raksasim: fiendish; those who are dominated by tamas and
who indulge in acts of cruelty.

asurim: demoniac; those dominated by rajas and qualities of
ambition, greed and the like. Sridhara.

They cling to the world of transient forms and are victims of
the deceitful nature (mohini prakrti) and disregard the under-
lying Reality.

13. mahatmanas tu mam partha
daivim prakrtim asritéh
bhajanty ananyamanaso
jnated bhittadim avyayam
(13) The great-souled, O Partha (Arjuna), who abide in
the divine nature, knowing (me as) the imperishable source
of all beings, worship Me with an undistracted mind.
Deceitful nature, mohini prakrti is contrasted with Divine
nature, daivi prakrti. If we are of the demoniac nature, we live
+ gham sarvesu bhiitesu bhittatma avasthitah sada

tam avajnaya man martyah kurute arcavidambanam,
IIL, 29, 24.244 The Bhagavadgita

in our separate ego consciousness, and make that the centre of
our activities, and get lost in the fruitless cycle of sarhsara and
miss our true destiny. On the other hand, if we are of a divine
nature, we open out to our true self-awareness, our whole nature
is turned towards the Divine and our whole life becomes a con-
tinuous adoration of the Supreme. The endeavour to possess the
Divine in knowledge and realize It in life succeeds and we act
in a dedicated spirit.

14. satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdhavratah
namasyantas ca mam bhaktya

nityayukta updsate
(14) Always glorifying Me, strenuous and steadfast in vows,
bowing down to Me with devotion, they worship Me, ever
disciplined.

jiatva (13) bhaktya nityayuktah. These words indicate how

the highest perfection is a combination of knowledge, devotion
and work.

 

15. jidnayajfena ca py anye
yajanto mam upiasate
ekatvena prthaktvena
bahudha visvatomukham

(15) Others again sacrifice with the sacrifice of wisdom and
worship Me as the one, as the distinct and as the manifold,
facing in all directions.

§. thinks that three classes of worshippers are mentioned here.
R. and Madhva hold that only one class is mentioned. Tilak
thinks that Advaita, Dvaita and Visistédvaita are meant,

Men worship the Supreme facing us in all ways, as one with
all existences and at the same time as separate from them.

1 Nilakantha says: ckatvena aham eva bhagavin vdsudeva ity
abheden aupanisadah, prthaktvena ayam isvaro mama svdmiti buddhy®
prakytah, anye punar bahudha bahuprakaram visvatomukham, sarvair
dvarair yat hificid dystars tad bhagavat svariipam eva, yacchrutam tat
tan namaiva ... yad uktarn bhuktam va, tattad arpitam evety evam
visvatomukhamn yathd syat tathd mam upasate.IX. The Lord 1s More Than His Creation 245

16. aharn kratur aham yajitah
svaaha ’ham aham ausadhant
mantro "ham aham eva jyam
aham agnir ahamt hutain

{16) I am the ritual action, I am the sacrifice, I am the
ancestral oblation, I am the (medicinal) herb, I am the
(sacred) hymn, I am also the melted butter, I am the fire
and I am the offering.

Ausadha or herb stands tor the food of all creatures.t The
Vedic sacrifice is interpreted as an offering of our whole nature,
an entire selfgiving to the Universal Self. What we receive from
Him, we give back to Him. ‘The gift and the surrender are both
His.

17. pita *ham asya jagato
mata dhata pitamahah
vedyam pavitram aumkara

rk sama yajur eva ca
(t7) Iam the father of this world, the mother, the supporter
and the grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier
Iam the syllable Aum and I am the rk, the sima and the
yajus as well

18, gatir bharta prabhuh sakst
nivasah Saranam suhyt
prabhavah pralayah sthanam

nidhanam bijam avyayam
(18) (I am) the goal, the upholder, the lord, the witness, the
abode, the refuge and the friend. (I am) the origin and the
dissolution, the ground, the resting place and the im-
perishable seed

Cp. “I take refuge in the Buddha. He is my refuge.’

19. tapamy aham aham varsam
nigrhnamy utsrjami ca
amrtam cai ’va mrtyus ca
sad asac ca *’ham arjuna

1 ausadham sarvapranibhiy yad adyate tad ausachasabdavacyam. §,
* buddhava Saranam gacchami esa me garanam246 The Bhagavadgita

(19) I give heat; I withhold and send forth the rain. I am
immortality and also death, I am being as well as non-
being, O Arjuna.

Cp. Rg. Veda: yasya chia amrtam yasya mrtyul:

Sat is the absolute reality and asat is the cosmic existence and
the Supreme is both. He is being when manifested and non-being
when the world is unmanifested.1

R. explains sat as present existence and asat as past and future
existence.

The main idea is that the Supreme Lord grants our prayers
in whatever form we worship Him,

20 traividya mam somapah piitapipa
yajnair istud svargatini prarthayante

te punyam asadya surendralokam

aSnanti divyan divi devabhogan

(20) The knowers of the three Vedas who drink the soma
juice and are cleansed of sin, worshipping Me with sacrifices,
pray for the way to heaven. They reach the holy world of
Indra (the lord of heaven) and enjoy in heaven the pleasures
of the gods

21. te tant bhukiva svargalokam visalam
sine punye martyalokam visanti
evam trayidharmam anuprapanna
gatagatam kimakama labhante

(21) Having enjoyed the spacious world of heaven, they
enter (return to) the world of mortals, when their merit is
exhausted; thus conforming to the doctrine enjoined in the
three Vedas and desirous of enjoyments, they obtain the
changeable (what is subject to birth and death).

The teacher here refers to the Vedic theory that those who
perform the prescribed ritual gain heavenly enjoyments after
death and points out how it cannot be regarded as the highest
goal. Such men are bound by the law of karma as they are still

1 karyakavane va sad asati. §,

2 alas tesdm visvatomukham mamabl.ajanam hurvatdm, sarva
ritpentham anugraham karomiti bhavah. Nilakantha.IX. The Lord is More Than His Creation 247

lured by desire, kaind-kdmndh, and they will return to this cosmo
procession since they act from an ego-centre and since their
ignorance is not destroyed. If we seek rewards in heaven, we will
gain them but we return to mortal existence so long as we do not
gain the true aim of life. Human life 1s an opportunity to develop
out of the imperfect material, soul’s divine nature. We operate
from the ego-centred consciousness, whether we seek the pleasures
of this world or of a future paradise.

22. ananydas cintayanio mam
ye janah paryupasate
iesarn nityabhiyuktanam
yogakseman vahamy aham
(22) But those who worship Me, meditating on Me alone,
to them who ever persevere, I bring attainment of what
they have not and security in what they have.

The teacher urges that the Vedic path is a snare to be avoided
by the aspirants after the highest.

God takes up all the burdens and the cares of His devotees.*

To become conscious of divine love, all other love must be
abandoned.3 If we cast ourselves entirely on the mercy of God,
He bears all our cares and sorrows. We can depend on His saving
care and energizing grace.

23. ye’py anyadevatabhakta
yajante Sraddhaya nvitah
te pt mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhipirvakam
(23) Even those who are devotees of other gods, worship
them with faith, they also sacrifice to Me alone, O Son of
Kunti (Arjuna), though not according to the true law.

+ yogo'praptasya prapanam, ksemas tad vaksanam. See II, 45.

2 bhagavin eva tesar yogaksemarh vahati.

3 Rabi’a was once asked. “Do you love God Almighty /” “Yes.”
“Do you hate the Devil?” ‘My love of God,” she replied, “leaves me *
no leisure to hate the Devil. I saw the prophet in a dream, He said,
O Rabr’a, do you love me?’ I said, ‘O Apostle of God, who does not
love thee’, but love of God hath so ‘absorbed me that neither love nor
hate of any other thing remains in my heart.’ ”

R.A. Nicholson: 4 Luerary History of the Arabs (1930), 234.248 The Bhagavadgita

The author of the Gita welcomes light from every quarter ot
the heaven. It has a right to shine because it is light.

24. aham hi sarvayajhanam
bhokta ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mam abhijanantt
tattvend ’tas cyavanti te
(24) For I am the enjoyer and lord of all sacrifices. But
these men do not know Me in My true nature and so they
fall.

25 ydnte devavrata devan
pilyn yanti pitroratah
bhiitani yanti bhittejya
yanti madyajino "pi mam

 

(25) Worshippers of the gods go to the gods, worshippers of
the manes go to the manes, sacrificers of the spirits go to
the spirits and those who sacrifice to Me come to Me

The shining gods, the spirits of the dead and the spifits in the
psychic world all happen to be worshipped by men in different
stages of development but they are all limited forms of the
Supreme and cannot give the aspiring soul the peace that is
beyond all understanding. The result of worship is assimilation
to the form worshipped and these limited forms give limited
results. No devotion fails of its highest reward. The lesser ones
bring lesser rewards while devotion to the Supreme brings the
supreme reward. All sincere religious devotion is a seeking after
the Supreme Godhead.

Devotion and Its Effects

26 pattram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad ahant bhaktyupahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
(26) Whosoever offers to Me with devotion a leaf, a flower,
a fruit, or water, that offering of love, of the pure of heart
I acceptIX. The Lord is More Than His Creation 249

However poor the oftering, if it is made with love and earnest-
ness, it is acceptable to the Lord. The way to the Highest is not
by way of subtle metaphysics or complicated ritual. It is by
sheer sclf-giving, which is symbolized by the offer of a leat, a
flower, a fruit or water. What is necessary is a devoted heart.

27. yat Rarosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva madarpanam

(27) Whatever thou doest, whatever thou eatest, whatever
thou offerest, whatever thou givest away, whatever aus-
terities thou dost practise—do that, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna),
as an offering to Me.

Selt-giving results in the consecration of all acts to God. The
tide of the common tasks of daily life must flow through the
worship of God. Love of God is not an escape from the harshness
of life but a dedication for service. Karmamarga or the way of
works which starts with the duty of performance of prescribed
rites concludes with the position that all tasks are sanctified when
done with disinterestedness and dedication.

“My self is Thy self, my understanding is Parvati (Siva’s wife),
my life functions are my comrades, the body is my home, my
worship is the varied enjoyment of the sense objects, my sleep
is the condition of concentration. My steps are movements round
the temple and all utterances are prayers. Whatever act is done
by me, every one of them, O Lord, is a worship of Thee.” If
you do whatever you have to do in a spirit of dedication, it is
God’s worship; nothing separate need be done.*

   

a van, girija matih, sahacarah pranah, Savivam grham,
piga me visayopabhogaracand, nidyd samadhsthitih
samcarah padayoh pradaksinavidhih stotrani sarvagiro
yadyat harma karomi tat tad akhilam Sambhé tavaradhanam.
+ Madhusiidana says:
avasyam bhavindyh karmandm mayi paramagurau samarpanam eva
madbhajanam; na tu tadartham prihag vyaparak kascit hartavya ity
abhiprayah.250 The Bhagavadgita

28. Subhasubhaphalaw evar
moksyase karmabandhanaih
Saranyasayogayuktatma
vimukto mam upaisyast

(28) Thus shalt thou be freed from the good and evil results
which are the bonds of action. With thy mind firmly set on
the way of renunciation, thou shalt become free and attain
to Me.

By such giving and consecration, the whole life of the soul is
given to the service of the Supreme and the ego is freed from its
barriers and its acts no more bind the soul.

29. samo "hams sarvabhiitesu
na me dvesyo 'sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu man bhaktya
mayi tz tesu ca py aham

(29) I am the same in (alike to) all beings. None is hatefu}
nor dear to Me But those who worship Me with devotion
they are in Me and I also in them.

God has no friends or foes. He is impartial. He dues not damn
any nor elect any by His capricious will. The only way to win
His love is by faith and devotion and each must tread the path
by himself.

30. api cet suduracéro
bhajate mam ananyabhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito ht sah

(30) Even if a man of the most vile conduct worships me
with undistracted devotion, he must be reckoned as righteous
for he has rightly resolved.

“By abandoning evil ways in his external life and by the power
of his internal right resolution.” $. Cp. also “If he repents after
he commits the sin, he is freed from sin; if he resolves that he
will never commit the sin again, he will be purified.” The evil

t hylvd papam hi sartapya tasmat papat pramucyate
naivam kuryash punar iti nivrttya piyate tu sah.IX. The Lord is More Than His Creation 251

of the past deeds cannot be washed away except by his turning
to God with undivided heart. Cp. Baudidyana Dharma Sutra:
“Let one feel daily repentant in mind, reflecting over misdeeds
committed and practising austerity and vigilance. By this will
he be freed from sin.”* Karma never binds completely. The sinner
in the lowest depths of degradation has the light in him which
he cannot put out, though he may try to stifle it and turn away
from it utterly. God holds us, fallen though we be, by the roots
of our being and is ready to send His rays of light into our dark
and rebellious hearts. The very consciousness of our imperfection
and sin betrays the pressure of the Divine on our hearts. Cp.
Tukiram: ‘Fallen of fallen, thrice fallen am I; but do Thou raise
me by Thy power. I have neither purity of heart nor a faith
firmly set at Thy feet. I am born of sin. How often shall I repeat
it? Says Tuka.” Again: “I am void of understanding, needy
and worse than needy. I cannot steady my mind; I cannot stay
my wayward senses. I have exhausted effort; peace and rest are
far from me. I have offered Thee perfect faith; I have laid my
life at Thy feet. Do now as Thou wilt, I can only look to Thee,
O God, I trust in Thee, I cling firmly to Thy feet. Tuka says,
It is for Thee to deal with my efforts.” The publican, in the
parable, prays from the depth of his heart, “God, be merciful to
me, a sinner.”

This verse does not mean that there is an easy escape from
the consequences of our deeds. We cannot prevent the cause
from producing its effect. Any arbitrary interference with the
order of the world is not permitted. When the sinner turns to
God with undistracted devotion, a new cause is introduced. His
redemption is conditional on his repentance. Repentance, as we
have noticed, is a genuine change of heart and includes contrition
or sorrow for the past sin and a decision to prevent a repetition
of it in the future. When once the resolution is adopted, the
transformation of the lower into the higher is steadily effected.
If we believe in human effort, the growth may be hard. Error,
imperfection and self-will are difficult to overcome, but when the
soul gives up its ego and opens itself to the Divine, the Divine
takes up the burden and lifts the soul into the spiritual plane.

* Soceta manasa nityarn dushrtany anucintayan

tapasvi capramadi ca tatah papat pramucyate,
* Fraser and Marathes: Tukaram: I, p. 92.252 The Bhagavadgita

Tulsidds says: “A piece of charcoal loses its blackness only when
fire penetrates it.’’* There are no unforgivable sins.

31. ksipram bhavati dharmatma
Sasvacchantin nigacchati
kaunteya pratijanihi
na me bhaktah pranasyati
(31) Swiftly does he become a soul of righteousness and
obtain lasting peace. O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), know thou
for certain that My devotee perishes never.

Once we place ourselves in the hands of the Divine, we cannot
fall into utter darkness.

Cp. Rama’s statement: “To him who seeks My protection even
once and requests help of Me saying ‘I am yours’ I shall give
him fearlessness from all beings. This is My resolve.”3

32. mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye ’pi syuh papayonayah
striyo vaiSyas tatha Stidras
tet yanti param gatim
(32) For those who take refuge in Me, O Partha (Arjuna),
though they are lowly born, women, Vaisyas, as well as
Siidras, they also attain to the highest goal

The message of the Gita is open to all without distinction of
race, sex or caste. This verse is not to be regarded as supporting
the social customs debarring women and Siidras from Vedic study.
It refers to the view prevalent at the time of the composition
of the Gita. The Gitd does not sanction these social rules.4 The

* Cp. Garuda purdna:

bhaktivastavidhd hy esd yasmin mlecchopi vartate
sa viprendro munih sriman sa yatih sa ca panditah,
1 pratijanihi pratijnarh kuru madbhakto na pranasyati,
3 sakydeva prapannaya tavasmiti ca yacate
abkayar sarvabhitebhyo dadamy etad vratarh mama,

Cp. the saying: na vasudevabhaktandrh asubhara vidyate hvacit.

4 In the early times, there was the tendency to look upon the
non-Hindus as barbarians, though this attitude of superiority was
not confined to the Hindus. The ancient Greeks looked uponIX. The Lord is More Than His Creation 253

Gita gets beyond racial distinctions in its emphasis on spiritual
values Its gospel of love is open to all men and women, persons
of all castes as well as those outside caste.

33. kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tatha
anityam asukham lokam
imam prépya bhajasva mim

(33) How much more then, holy Brahmins and devoted
royal saints; having entered this impermanent sorrowful
world, do thou worship Me.:

In other words, even those who, on account of their past births,
suffer from many disabilities, and are given to worldly pursuits
can overcome their weakness and attain the highest. The path
is easier for those Brahmins and royal sages who are spiritually
disposed.

anityam asukhamt lokam: impermanent sorrowful world. To the
Orphics life in this world is pain and weariness. We are bound
to a wheel which turns through endless cycles of births and
deaths. Only by purification and renunciation can we escape from
the wheel and attain to the joy of union with God. John Burnet
refers to the striking similarity between the Orphic beliefs and
those prevalent in India at about the same time. Early Greek

foreigners as barbarians. The Roman general, Quntilian Varus said
of the inhabitants of Germania: “It is true, they are men, but except
the voice and limbs of the body they have nothing of human beings
in them,” The French philosopher, Montesquieu, (1689-1755), said
of the Negroes: “One cannot well imagine that God who is so
wise should have put a soul, moreover an immortal soul, into an
entirely black body. It is impossible to think that these people are
human beings.”

« It is a matter of deep humiliation and shame to every sensible
Hindu to think that sometimes attempts are made to justify un-
touchability. The Buddha welcomed antyajas into his sangha. In
the Ramayana, one who will now be regarded as an untouchable
took Rama across the Ganges in his boat. The great teachers of
bhakti, Saiva and Vaisnava, have striven for equality and proclaimed
that believers in God, whatever their origin, are the best of the
twiceborn. candalopi dvijasresthah hari bhaktiparayanat. Among the
followers of Caitanya were Hindus and Moslems, robbers and pros
titutes.254 The Bhagavadgita

Philosophy (1930), p. 82. The teaching of the Buddha has for its
starting point these features of the universe, its impermanence
and pain.! There is a Persian saying attributed to Jesus. “The
world is a bridge, pass over it but do not build upon it.” Not
merely the world but every phase of the cosmic process, every
aspect of human history, every stage of man’s life—the freshness
of infancy, the crudeness of boyhood, the idealism of youth, the
hot passions of adolescence and the ambitions of manhood are
all bridges, meant for transit and not permanent habitation
Modern science demonstrates how miserably conditioned human
life is. Jean-Paul Sartre’s theory of existentialism assumes ‘hat
human existence is subject to certain permanent conditions. Each
of us is born, is implicated in a reality which is not dependent
on him, acts on other people and is exposed to action on their
part. He cannot escape from death. These conditions taken
together make of human existence a tragic reality. Each of us,
in this desperate condition, has to work out his salvation by the
effort of his will. For the existentialist, man is left to his own
resources. He has no faith in the saving grace of God. The teacher
of the Gita shows us a way out of the transitoriness of things,
the curse of age and death, jar@maranamoksaya.? He asks us to
take refuge in the Divine.

34. manmana bhava madbhakto
madyaji man namaskuru
mam evar’ syasi yuktvai vam
aimanam matparayanah

(34) On Me fix thy mind; to Me be devoted; worship Me;
revere Me; thus having disciplined thyself, with Me as thy
goal, to Me shalt thou come

It is not the personal Krsna to whom we have to give ourselves
up utterly but the Unborn, Beginningless, Eternal who speaks
through Krsna. The way to rise out of our ego-centred conscious-
ness to the divine plane is through the focusing of all our ener-
gies, intellectual, emotional and volitional on God. Then our whole
being is transformed and lifted up into the unity and universality

«Cp. XIIL, 8. > VII, 29.IX. The Lord is More Than His Creation 255

of spirit. Knowledge, love and power gét fused in a supreme
unification. Joy and peace are the result of self-oblivion, of utter
abandonment, of absolute acceptance.

th

 

. rajavidyavijaguhyayogo nama navame 'dhyayah

This is the ninth chapter entitled The Yoga of Sovereign
Knowledge and Sovereign MysteryCHAPTER X
God is the Source of all; to know Him is to know all

The Immanence and Transcendence of God
Svibhagavan uvaca
1. bhtiya eva mahalaho
Synu me paramam vacah
yat te "ham priyamanaya
vaksyami hitakamyaya
The Blessed Lord said:

(x) Again, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), hearken to My supreme
word. From a desire to do thee good, I will declare it to
thee, now that thou art taking delight (in My words).

Priyaménaya may also be rendered “who art beloved.”

2. name viduh suraganah
prabhavani na maharsavah
aham adir hi devanarir
maharsinam ca sarvasah
(2) Neither the hosts of gods nor the great sages know any
origin of Me for I am the source of the gods and the great
sages in every way.

sarvasah: in every way; sarvaprakaraih. S.

The Supreme is the unborn eternal and He is also the lord ot
the world, Though He has no birth, all existences derive from
Him. The teacher announces that He is in truth the Eternal God
Himself, more ancient than al] else and that all manifested glory
is from Him.

3. yo mam ajam anddim ca
vetti lokamahesvaram

asarnmiidhah sa martyesu
sarvapapath pramucyate

(3) He who knows Me, the unborn, without beginn.ng,X. Godis the Source of All; to Know Himisto Know All 257

also the mighty lord of the worlds, he, among mortals is
undeluded and freed from all sins

When we learn to look at things as derived from the One
Transcendent Reality, we are delivered from all groping and
bewilderment.

4. buddhir jianam asammohah
ksama satyam damah Samah
sukham duhkham bhavo ’bhavo
bhayam ca *bhayam eva ca
(4) Understanding, knowledge, freedom from bewilderment,
patience, truth, self-control and calmness; pleasure and
pain, existence and non-existence, fear and fearlessness.
dama: self-control is quietude of the external senses.
Sama: calmness It is calmness of inner spirit.

5. ahimsd samata tusts
tapo dinam yaso 'yasah
bhavanti bhava bhitanam
matta eva prihagvidhah
(5) Non-violence, equal-mindedness, contentment, austerity,
charity, fame and ill-fame (are) the different states of beings
which proceed from Me alone.

alwmsa@: non-violence; in old texts it means non-hurting,
especially non-killing.

All these separate states of being issue in accordance with the
past karma of beings.! The Divine is indirectly responsible even
for the pain and suffering of the world. He is the lord of the world
and guides it, though He is unaffected by its oppositions,

6. maharsayah sapta piirve
catvaro manavas tatha
madbhava manasa jaté
yesam loka imah prajah
(6) The seven great sages of old, and the four Manus also
are of My nature and born of My mind and from them are
all these creatures in the world.

' suaharmanuripena. §,258 The Bhagavadgita

These are the powers in charge of the many processes of the
world. Manu according to tradition is the first man at the begin-
ning of each new race of beings.

7. etam vibhiitin yogam ca
mama yo veiti tativatah
so ’vikampena yogena
yujyate na ’tra samsayah

(7) He who knows in truth this glory (magnifestation) and
power (steady action) of Mine is united (with Me) by un-
faltering yoga; of this there is no doubt.

vibhiiti: glory.1 The knower will be aware of his unity with
the Divine and participate in the work of the world which is a
manifestation of the Divine. The knowledge of the determinate
Brahman is the way to the knowledge of the indeterminate
Brahman.+

Knowledge and Devotion

8. aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartate
itt matua bhajante mam
budha bhavasamanvitah

(8) I am the origin of all; from Me all (the whole creation)
proceeds. Knowing this, the wise worship Me, endowed with
conviction.

bhava: the right state of mind. R.

The teacher speaks now as the Lord, as [§vara. God is the
material and efficient cause of the world. The aspirant is not
deluded by the passing forms but knowing that the Supreme is
the source of all the forms, he worships the Supreme.

: vibhiitivh vistavam for §., aiSvaryam for R. right feeling, zeal, faith.
Commenting on §., Anandagiri says “vividha bhitir bhavanam
taibhavar sarvdtmakatuam.” It is the glory of manifestation.

2 sopadhikajiianam nirupadhikajiane dvaram. Anandagiri.X. God is the Source of All; to Know Him is to Know All 259

Q. maccitta madgataprana
bodhayantah parasparam
hathayantaS ca mam nityam
tusyanti ca ramanti ca

(9) Their thoughts (are fixed) in Me, their lives (are wholly)
given up to Me, enlightening each other and ever conversing
of Me, they are contented and rejoicing in Me.

10. lesan satatayuktanam
bhajatam pritipirvakam
dadami buddhiyogam tarh
yena mam upayanti te

(10) To these who are constantly devoted and worship Me
with love, I grant the concentration of understanding by
which they come unto Me.

buddhiyoga : the devotion of mind by which the disciple gains the
wisdom which sees the One in all the forms which change and pass.

Il. tesam eva 'nukampartham
aham ajfianajam tamah
nasayamy aimabhavastho
jiidnadipena bhasvata
(rx) Out of compassion for those same ones, remaining within
My own true state, I destroy the darkness born of ignorance
by the shining lamp of wisdom.

God affects the world for man’s welfare, Himself remaining
apart from it. Atmabhava is also interpreted as the inner sense of
beings. Here the teacher makes out how bhakti or devotion leads
to the destruction of ignorance and the rise of illumination. When
ignorance is destroyed, God stands revealed in the human spirit.
When love and wisdom arise, the eternal is fulfilled in the indi-
vidual. Bhakti is also a means to jiiana. Through it we obtain
Divine grace and the power of understanding, buddhiyoga.
Intellectual knowledge is rendered luminous and certain by the
direct intuition of buddhi.260 The Bhagavadgita
The Lord is the Seed and Perfection of All that Is
arjuna waca
12 param brahma param dhama
pavitram paramam bhavan
purusarh SaSvatam divyam
adidevam ajarit vibhum
Arjuna said
(12) Thou art the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Abode

and the Supreme Purifier, the Eternal, Divine Person, the
First of the gods, the Unbom, the All-pervading

13. Ghus tuam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tathé
asito devalo vyasah
svayam cat ’va bravisi me

(13) All the sages say this of Thee, as well as the divine
seer Narada, so also Asita, Devala, Vyasa and Thou thyself
declarest it to me .

Arjuna accepts the truth of what has been declared and
proclaims his conviction that Krsna who is speaking to him is
the Supreme Godhead, the Absolute, the Ever-free to which we
can rise by self-surrender. He gives utterance from his own
experience to the truth revealed by the seers who have seen it
and become one with it. The secret wisdom is revealed by God,
the seers are witnesses to it and Arjuna himself verifies it from
his own experience. Abstract truths uttered by the sages become
now luminous intuitions, glowing experiences of one’s whole
being.

14. sarvam etad rlamt manye
yan man vadasi kesava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
vidur deva na danavah

(14) I hold as true, all this that thou sayest to me, O Kegava
(Krsna); neither the gods nor the demons, O Lord, know
Thy manifestation.X. God is the Source of All; to Know Himisto Know All 261

15. Ssvayam evd 'tmand tmanam
vettha toarh purusottama
bhiitabhivana bhiitesa
devadeva jagatpate
(15) Verily Thou Thyself knowest Thyself by Thyself,
O Supreme Person; the Source of beings, the Lord of
creatures; the God of gods, the Lord of the world!

16. vaktum arhasy asesena
divya hy atmavibhiitayah
yabhir vibhiitibhir lokan

imams tuam vyapya tisthasi
(16) Thou shouldst tell me of Thy divine manifestations,
without exception, whereby, pervading these worlds, Thou
dost abide (in them and beyond).

vibhiitayah: manifestations, the divine glories by which the

Supreme pervades all the worlds. They are the formative forces
or spiritual powers which give to each object its essential nature.
They are akin to Plato’s Divine Ideas, the perfect types and
patterns of all things here below. Only the word ‘idea” is likely
to suggest a pale abstraction, a bloodless category. Vibhiati is
a living formative principle.

17 katham vidyim ahart yogims
twam sada paricintayan
hesu-kesu ca bhavesu
cintyo ’si bhagavan maya
(17) How may I know Thee, O Yogin, by constant medita-
tion? In what various aspects art Thou, O Blessed Lord,
to be thought of by me?

Krsna is yogin by virtue of his work as creator. Arjuna wishes
to know the aspects of nature where the Lord’s presence is more
clearly manifest and asks Krsna to tell him in what various
aspects he should think of Him to help his meditation.

18, vistarena 'tmano yogam
vibhitim ca jandrdana
bhityah kathaya trptir hi
Srpvato na ’sti me 'nuyrtam262 The Bhagavadgita

(18) Relate to me again in detail, O Janardana (Krsna), of
Thy power and manifestation; for I am not satiated with
hearing Thy nectar-like speech.

amytam: nectar-like. His words are life-giving.

The Git@ does not set up an opposition between Brahman and
the world, between the Ineffable Reality and its inadequate
expression, It gives a comprehensive spiritual view. It, no doubt,
mentions the Indefinable (anirdesyam), the Unmanifest Immutable
(avyaktam aksaram), the Unthinkable (acifityaripam), the Abso-
lute beyond all empirical determination. But worship of the
Absolute is difficult for embodied beings. It is easier to approach
the Supreme through Its relations with the world and this method
is more natural. The Supreme is the Personal Lord who controls
the many-sided action of nature and dwells in the heart of every
creature, Parabrahman is Paramevara, the God in man and in
the universe. But His nature is veiled by the series of becomings.
Man has to discover his spiritual unity with God and so with all
His creatures.

Sribhagavan uvaca
19. hanta te kathayisyami
divya hy atmavibhitayah
pradhanyatah kurusrestha
na ’sty anto vistarasya me
The Blessed Lord said:

(19) Yes, I will declare to thee of My divine forms but only
of those which are prominent, O best of the Kurus (Arjuna),
for there is no end to my extent (the details).

20. aham dtma gudakesa
sarvabhiitisayasthitah
aham adis ca madhy ari ca

bhiitandm anta eva ca
(20) I, O Gudakesa (Arjuna), am the self seated in the
hearts of all creatures. I am the beginning, the middle and
the very end of beings.

The world is a living whole, a vast interconnectedness, a cosmic
harmony inspired and sustained by the One Supreme.
« XI, 5.X God ts the Source of All; to Know Himisto Know All 263
2i ddityandm aham visnur
jyotisam ravir amsuman
mariciy marutam asmi
naksatranam aham Sasi
(21) Of the Adityas I am Visnu; of the lights (I am) the
radiant Sun; I am Marici of the Maruts; of the stars I am
the moon. .

Adityas are Vedic gods. While the Supreme is in all things,
He is more prominent in some than in others. There is an
ascending order in the world. God is more revealed in life than
in matter, in consciousness than in life and in saints and sages
most of all. Within the same order, He is most revealed in the
pre-eminent individuals. Some of these mythological beings were
perhaps living realities to the Hindus of the period of the Gita.

22. vedandm samavedo ’smi
devandm asmi vasavah
indriyanam manag ca ’smi
ohutandm asmi cetana
(22) Of the Vedas I am the Samaveda: of the gods I am
Indra; of the senses I am mind and of beings I am con-
sciousness.
Samaveda is mentioned as the chief of the Vedas on account
of its musical beauty.

23 rudrinam Samaras ca ’smi
vitteso yaksaraksasam
vasiinam pavakas ca ’smi
meruh Sikharinam aham
(23) Of the Rudras I am Sarhkara (Siva); of the Yaksas
and the Rakgsasas (I am) Kubera; of the Vasus I am Agni
(Fire) and of mountain-peaks I am Meru.

24. purodhasam ca mukhyam mam
viddhi partha byhaspatim
senanindm aham skandah
savasim asmi sagarah
1 sdmavedo ganena ramaniyatuat, Nilakantha,264 The Bhagavadgita

(24) Of the household priests, O Partha (Arjuna), know Me
to be the chief—Brhaspati; of the (war) generals I am
Skanda; of the lakes I am the ocean

25 maharsinam bhrgur aham
giram asmy ekam aksaram
yajhindm japayajho ’sms
sthavaranam himdlayah
(25) Of the great sages I am Bhrgu; of utterances, T
am the single syllable Aum; of offerings I am the offering
of silent meditation and of unmovable things (I am) the
Himalaya.

26. asvatthah sarvavrksanam
devarsinam ca naradah
gandharvanam citrarathah
siddhaném kapilo munth

(26) Of all trees (I am) the Asvattha and of divine seers (Iam)
Narada; among the gandharvas (I am) Chitraratha and of
the perfected ones (I am) Kapila the sage

Kapila is the teacher of the Sarkhya philosophy.

27. uccaihsravasam asvanam
viddhi mam amrtodbhavam
airavatam gajendranam
naranam ca naradhipam
(27) Of Horses, know me to be Ucchaigravas, born of nectar;
of lordly elephants (I am) Airavata and of men (I am) the
monarch.

28. ayudhanam aham vajram
dheniindm asmi kamadhuk
prajanas ca&’smi kandarpah
Sarpanam asmi vasukih
(28) Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; of the cows I am the
cow of plenty; of the progenitors I am the God of love; of
the serpents I am Vasuki.X. God is the Source of All; to Know Himisto Know All 265

29. anantas cé smi nd,
varuno yadasam aham
pitrnam aryama ca’ smi

yamah sanyamatam aham

 

(29) Of the nagas I am Ananta; of the dwellers in water I
am Varuna; of the (departed) ancestors I am Aryama; of
those who maintain law and order, I am Yama.

30. prahladas ca smi daityanam
Ralah kalayatam aham
mrganan ca mrgendro ’ham
vainateyas ca paksinam
(30) Of the Titans I am Prahlada; of calculators I am Time:
of beasts I am the King of beasts (lion) and of birds (I am)
the son of Vinata (Garuda).

 

 

31 pavanah pavatim asmi
vamah Sastrabhytim aham
ghasanart makaras ca ’smi
srotasam asmi jah :avi

(31) Of purifiers I am the wind; of warriors I am Rama; of
fishes I am the alligator and of rivers I am the Ganges.

32. sargaindm adir antas ca
madhyam cat va *ham arjuna
adhyatmavidya vidyanam
vadah pravadatam aham
(32) Of creations I am the beginning, the end and also the
middle, O Arjuna; of the sciences (I am) the science of the
self; of those who debate I am the dialectic.

adhyatmavidya vidyanam: of the sciences I am the science of the
self. The science of the self is the way to beatitude. It is not an
intellectual exercise or a social adventure. It is the way to saving
wisdom and so is pursued with deep religious conviction. Philo-
sophy as the science of the self helps us to overcome the ignorance
which hides from us the vision of reality. It is the universal
science according to Plato. Without it, the departmental sciences266 The Bhagavadgita

become misleading. Plato observes: “The possession of the
sciences as a whole, if it does not include the best, will in some
few cases aid but more often harm the owner.” Alcibiades, II,
144 D.
33. aksarandm akaro’smt
dvandvah samasikasya ca
aham eva ’ksayah kalo
adhata *ham visvatomukhah

(33) Of letters I am (the letter) A and of compounds (I am)
the dual ; I also am imperishable time and I the creator whose
face is turned on all sides.

ala: time. Cp. kélasvaritpi bhagavan krsnah. Visnu purana, v. 38.

34 mytyuh sarvaharas ca ’ham
udbhavas ca bhavisyatam
kirtih Srir vak ca narinam

smytiy medha dhytih ksama
(34) I am death, the all-devouring and (am) the origin of
things that are yet to be; and of feminine beings, (I am)
fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, firmness
and patience

35 brhatsama tathé samnam
gayatri chandasim aham
mésanam margasirso ham
stinam kusumakarah
(35) Likewise, oc hymns (I am) Brihatsiman, of metres
(I am) gayatri; of months (I am) margagirsa ard of seasons
(Iam) the flower-bearer (spring)

30. dyiitam chalayatim asmi
tejas tejasvinam aham
Jayo smi vyavasayo 'smi
Sattvam sattvavatém aham
(36) Of the deceitful I am the gambling; of the splendid
1 am the splendour; I am victory; I am effort and I am the
goodness of the goodX. God is the Source of All; to Know Him is to Know All 267

37 ursnindrm vasudevo ’smi
pandavinim dhanamjayal
munindm apy aham vyasah
havinam usana kavih
(37) Of the Vrsnis I am Vasudeva; of the Pandavas
(I am) the Winner of wealth (Arjuna); of the sages I am
Vyasa also and of the poets (I am) the poet Usana.

38 dando damayatam asm
nitir asmi jigisatam
maunam cat va ’smi guhyanam
jianam jianavatam aham
(38) Of those who chastise I am the rod (of chastisement);
of those that seek victory I am the wise policy; of things
secret I am the silence and of the knowers of’ wisdom I am
the wisdom.
39. yac ca pi sarvabhitandm
bijam tad aham arjuna
na tad asti vind yat syan
maya bhitam caracaram
(39) And further, whatsoever is the seed of all existences
that am I, O Arjuna; nor is there anything, moving or un-
moving that can exist without Met

 

40. nd nto ’sti mama divyanam
vibhiitindm paramtapa
esa tii ‘ddeSatah prokto
vibhiiter vistaro maya
(40) There is no end to My divine manifestations, O Con-
queror of the foe (Arjuna). What has been declared by Me
is only illustrative of My infinite glory

41. yad-yad vibhiitimat sattoam
Srimad iirjitam eva vé
tat-tad eva ’vagaccha tvant
mama tejomsasambhavam
* Cp, Draupadi’s address:
martyala caiva bhilandm amaratvam dwaukasam
tvayi sarvarm mahabaho lokakaryam pratisthitam268 The Bhagavadgita

(41) Whatsoever being there is, endowed with glory and grace
and vigour, know that to have sprung from a fragment of
My splendour

While all things are supported by God, things of beauty and
splendour reveal Him more than others. Every deed of heroism,
every life of sacrifice, every work of genius, is a revelation of the
Divine. The epic moments of a man’s life are inexplicably beyond
the finite mind of man.

42. athava bahunai ‘tena
kim jfdtena tavé 'rjuna
vistabhya "ham idam krisnam
ehamSena sthito jagat
(42) But what need is there, O Arjuna, for such detailed
knowledge by you? I support this entire universe pervading
it with a single fraction of Myself

ekamSena: by a single fraction. Not that the Divine unity 1s
broken up into fragments. This cosmos is but a partial revelation
of the Infinite, is illumined by one ray of His shining light. The
transcendent light of the Supreme dwells beyond all this cosmos,
beyond time and space

ti vibhiitiyogo nama dasamo 'dhyayah
This isthe tenth chapter entitled The Yoga of Manifestation

1 Cp. Rg. Veda. pado asya vibud bhitani wripad asyamrtam divi.
X, 90, 3. The Purusa Sikta makes out that all this is only a descrip-
tion of His greatness, the Purusa himself is much greater than this.
See also Chandogya Up., III, 12, 6 and Maitrdyant Up., VI, 4.
Commenting on N.7, Abhinavagupta who reads fad dimaySam for
tad almanam. writes: éri Bhagavan kila punasadgunyatvat Sariva
samparkamitrarahitopi sthitikdritudt kdrunikataya dtmarasam srjati,
dima pirnasddgunyah amsah upakdrakatvena apradhdnabhiito yatra
tat Gtmamnsam sariram gyhnati ity arthah.CHAPTER XI
The Lord’s Transfiguration

Arjuna wishes to see the Universal Form of God
arjuna woaca
1. madanugrahaya paramam
guhyam adhyatmasamgintam
yat tvayo ’ktam vacas tena
moho ‘yarn vigato mama

Arjuna said:
(1) The supreme mystery, the discourse concerning the
Self which thou hast given out of grace for me—by this my
bewilderment is gone from me.

The illusion that things of the world exist in themselves and
maintain themselves, that they live and move apart from God
has disappeared.

2. bhavapyayau ha bhitanam
Srutau vistaraso maya
twaitah kamalapattraksa
mahaimyam api ca ’vyayam
(2) The birth and passing away of things have been heard

by me in detail from Thee, O Lotus-eyed (Krsna), as also
Thy imperishable majesty

3 evam etad yathé ’ttha am
atminam paramesvara

drastum icchami te ripam
aiSvaram purusottama

(3) As Thou hast declared Thyself to be, O Supreme Lord,
even so it is. (But) I desire to see Thy divine form, O Supreme
Person.

It is one thing to know that the Eternal Spirit dwells in all
things and another to have the vision of it. Arjuna wishes to see270 The Bhagavadgita

the Universal Form, the visible embodiment of the Unseen Divine
how He is the “birth and passing away of all beings.” X, 8
The abstract metaphysical truth should be given visible reality.

4 manyase yadt tac chakyara
maya drastum iti prabho
yogesvara tato me tvam
darsaya ‘tmanam avyayam

(4) If Thou, O Lord, thinkest that by me, It can be seen,
then reveal to me, Thy Imperishable Self, O Lord of yoga
(Krsna).

The Revelation of the Lord

Sribhagavan uvéca
5 pasya me partha ritpini
Sataso 'tha sahasrasah
nanadvidhani divyani
nandavarnakyrtim ca
The Blessed Lord said:
(5) Behold, O Partha (Arjuna), My forms, a hundred-fold, a
thousand-fold, various in kind, divine, of various colours
and shapes.

The stupendous self-revelation of Divine power is manifested
to Arjuna who understands the true meaning of the cosmic
process and destiny. In M.B., VI, 131, it is said that Krsna
appeared in His world-form to Duryodhana, who attempted to
make Him a prisoner when He approached Duryodhana for a
final attempt at reconciliation.

The vision is not a myth or a legend but spiritual experience.
In the history of religious experience, we have a number of such
visions. The transfiguration of Jesus, the vision of Saul on the

« Mark ix, 2-8, Saint Hildegard (1098-1180) reports a vision in
which she saw a “fair human form” who declared his identity in
words reminiscent of the Gita description. “I am that supreme and
fiery force that sends forth all the sparks of life. Death hath no part
in me, yet do I allot it, wherefore I am girt about with wisdom

as with wings. I am that living and fiery essence of the divine
substance that glows in the beauty of the fields. I shine in the water,XI. The Lord’s Transfiguration 271

Damascus Road, Constantine’s vision of the Cross bearing
the motto “In this sign, conquer,” Joan of Arc’s visions are
experiences akin to the vision of Arjuna.

6. pasyd ‘dityan vasiin rudran
asvinau marutas tatha
bahiiny adystapiirvani
pasya ’Scaryani bharata
(6) Behold, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the two
Agvins and also the Maruts. Behold, O Bharata (Arjuna),
many wonders never seen before.

7 that ’kastharn jagat krisnam
pasya 'dya sacaracaram
mama dehe gudakesa
yac ca’ nyad drastum tcchasi

(7) Here today, behold the whole universe, moving and un-
moving and whatever else thou desirest to see, O Gudakesa
(Arjuna), all unified in My body.

It is the vision of ail in the One. When we develop our full
capacity of apprehension, we see that all (past, present and future)
is present.

8. na tu mam Sakyase drastum
anenai "va svacaksusa
divyam daddmi te caksuh
pasya me yogam aisvaram

(8) But thou canst not behold Me with this (human) eye
of yours; I will bestow on thee the supernatural eye. Behold
My divine power.

I burn in the sun and the moon and the stars. Mine 1s that mysterious
force of the invisible wind. I sustain the breath of all living. I breathe
in the verdure and in the flowers, and when the waters flow like
living things, it is I, I formed those columns that support the whole
earth, . . . All these live because I am in them and am of their life.
I am wisdom. Mine is the blast of the thundered word by which all
things were made. I permeate all things that they may not die.
I am life.” Quoted in Studies mn the History and Method of Science,
edited by Charles Singer (1917), p. 33-272 The Bhagavadgita

No fleshly eye can see that sovereign form. Human eye is not
made for such excess of light. Divya caksus is the angelic eye
while marisa caksus is the eye of the flesh."

Human eyes can see only the outward forms; the inner soul
is perceived by the eye of spirit. There is a type of knowledge
that we can acquire by our own efforts, knowledge based on the
deliverances of the senses and intellectual activity. Another kind
of knowledge is possible when we are under the influence of grace,
a direct knowledge of spiritual realities. The god-vision is a gift
af god. The whole account is a poetic device to indicate the unity
of the cosmic manifold in the Divine nature.

The vision is not a mental construction but the disclosure of
a truth from beyond the finite mind. The spontaneity and
directness of the experience are brought out here.

Sarijaya Describes the Form
samjaya uvdca
9 evam uktva tato rajan
mahayogesvaro harih
darsayam asa parthaya
paraman riipam aisvaram

Samjaya said
(9) Having thus spoken, O King, Hari, the great lord of
yoga, then revealed to Partha (Arjuna), His Supreme and
Divine Form.

« The Upanisad says:

Hearing they hear not; knowing they know not; seeing they see
not; only with the eye of enlightenment do they see.

Synvanio pi na srnvanti jananto pi na janate

pasyanto pi na pasyanit, pasyanti jacnacaksusah.
Moksadharma has the following verse:

maya hy es@ maya srsta yan mam pasyast navada

sarvabhiitagunair yuktam na tu mirh drastum arhasi,

Commenting on it, Madhusiidana says: sarvabhiitagunair yuktarm
haranopadhin mir carmacaksusa drastusn narhasi.”’

Cp. the Prophet's words: “Lord, open his eyes that he may see.”
See also the Vision of Ezekiel, Exodus xxxiii, 18; Revelation iv:
and Saddharmapundavika, |. ‘Arise, shine; for thy light is come,
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Thou shalt see and
be radiant and thy heart shall thrill and be enlarged” (saiah Ix, 1-5)XI. The Lord’s Transfiguration 2973

This is Krgna’s transfiguration where Arjuna sees all the
creatures in heaven and earth in the Divine Form.

10. anekavaktranayanam
anekddbhutadarsanam
anekadivyabharanam
divyanekodyatayudham
(to) Of many mouths and eyes, of many visions of marvel,
of many divine ornaments, of many divine uplifted weapons.

The poet seems to feel here the dearth of words, the roughness
of speech in trying to describe an experience which 1s essentially
ineffable.

anekavakivanayanam: many mouths and eyes. He is all-
devouring and all-seeing.

These are descriptions of the Universal Being. In the Purusa
Sakta also, a similar account is found. sahasrasirsa purusah
sahasraksah sahasrapat (Rg. Veda, X, 90). Cp. Mundaka Up.,
IL, 1, 4.

II divyamalyambaradharam
divyagandhanulepanam
sarvascaryamayam devam
anantam visvatomukham
{tr) Wearing divine garlands and raiments, with divine
perfumes and ointments, made up of all wonders, resplendent,
boundless, with face turned everywhere.

12 dtvi siiryasahasrasya
bhaved yugapad uithita
yadi bhah sadysi sa sydd
bhasas tasya mahatmanah
(t2) If the light of a thousand suns were to blaze forth all
at once in the sky, that might resemble the splendour of
that exalted Being

13. tairar ‘kastham jagat krtsnam
pravibhaktam anekadha
apasyad devadevasyu
Sarive pindavas tada274 The Bhagavadgita

(13) There the Pandava (Arjuna) beheld the whole universe
with its manifold divisions gathered together in one, in the
body of the God of gods.

Arjuna had the vision of the One in the many and the many in
the One. All things remain the same and yet all are changed.
There is astonishment at the disappearance of the familiar land-
marks of the everyday world. Everything is interfused, each with
each and mirrors the whole. The vision is a revelation of the
potential divinity of all earthly life.

Arjuna Addresses the Lord

14 tatah sa vismaydvisto
hrstaroma dhanarhjayah
pranamya Sirasa devam
krtaajaliry abhasata
(t4) Then he, the Winner of wealth (Arjuna), struck with
amazement, his hair standing on end, bowed down his head
to the Lord, with hands folded (in salutation), said:

In an agony of awe, his hair uplift, his head on high, his hands
clasped in supplication, Arjuna adores.

arjuna uvaca
15 pasyami devams tava deva dehe
sarvdms tatha bhittavisesasamghan
brahmanam isam kamalasanastham
rsims ca sarvan uragams ca divyan
Arjuna said:

(15) In Thy body, O God, I see all the gods and the varied
hosts of beings as well, Brahmi, the lord seated on the lotus
throne and all the sages and heavenly nagas.

The vision of God widens our horizon and takes us beyond the
earthly tumults and sorrows which so easily obsess us. God’s
creation is not limited to this small planet, which is only an
insignificant part of the cosmos. Arjuna sees the great and various
cumpany of spirits filling the universe.XI. The Lord’s Transfiguration 295

16. anekabahiidaravaktranetram
pasyami tum sarvato 'nantariipam
nad ‘nian na madhyam na punas tava dine

pasydmi visvesvara visvariipa
(16) I behold Thee, infinite in form on all sides, with number-
less arms, bellies, faces and eyes, but I see not Thy end or
Thy middle or Thy beginning, O Lord of the universe, 0
Form Universal.

vakira: faces or mouths,

17 kivitinam gadinam cakrinam ca
tejorasim sarvato diptimantam
pasydmi tvdm durnirtksyam samantad

diptanalarkadyutim aprameyam
(17) I behold Thee with Thy crown, mace and discus,
glowing everywhere as a mass of light, hard to discern,
(dazzling) on all sides with the radiance of the flaming fire
and sun, incomparable.

18. tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam
tvam asya viSvasya param nidhinam
tvam avyayah Sasvatadharmagopta
sandtanas tuam puruso mato me
(x8) Thou art the Imperishable, the Supreme to be realized.
Thou art the ultimate resting-place of the universe; Thou
art the undying guardian of the eternal law. Thou art the
Primal Person, I think.
aksaram: imperishable. Arjuna states that the Supreme 1s both
Brahman, and Igvara, Absolute and God.
Sasvatadharmagopta: the undying guardian of the eternal law.
Abhinavagupta reads sattvatadharmagopia, the guardian of the
sittvata dharma.

19. anadimadhyantam anantaviryam
anantabahum Sasisiiryanetram
pasyami tuam diptahutasavaktrarn
svatejasa visvam idam tapantam
¥ elena sagunariipasya nirgunajiapakatvam ukiam, Nilakan tha.276 The Bhagavadgita

(19) I behold Thee as one without beginning, middle or end,
of infinite power, of numberless arms, with the moon and
the sun as Thine eyes, with Thy face as a flaming fire, whose
radiance burns up this universe

20. dydvadprthivyor tdam antaram hi
vyaptam tvayai ’hena digas ca sarvah
drstua ‘dbhutam riipam ugram tave ’dam
lokatrayam pravyathitarh mahatman

(20) This space between heaven and earth is pervaded by
Thee alone, also all the quarters (directions of the sky)
O Exalted One, when this wondrous, terrible form of Thine
is seen, the three worlds tremble

2: ami ht tam surasamghd visant
hecid bhitah pranjalayo grnant
svasti "ty uktva maharsisiddhasamghah
stuvanti tudm stutibhih puskalabhih

(21) Yonder hosts of gods enter Thee and some, in fear, extol
Thee, with folded hands, and bands of great seers and
perfected ones cry “‘hail’” and adore Thee with hymns of
abounding praise.

The spiritual hosts adore His glory and are lost in ecstatic
worship

22 rudraditya vasavo ye ca sadhya
visve ’Svinau marutas co ’smapas ca
gandharvayaksasurasiddhasamgha

viksante tum vismitas cai ’va sarve
(22) The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Sadhyas; the
Vigvedevas, the two Aévins, the Maruts and the Manes and
the hosts of Gandharvas, Yaksas, Asuras and Siddhas, all
gaze at Thee and are quite amazed.

23. riipam mahat te bahuvaktranetram
mahabaho bahubahirupadam
bahiidaram bahudamstrakavralam
dystua lokah pravyathitas tatha ‘hamXI. The Lord's Transfiguration 277

(23) Seeing Thy great form, of many mouths and eyes, O
Mighty-armed, of many arms, thighs and: feet, of many
bellies, terrible with many tusks, the worlds tremble and
so dol

This is a poetic exaggeration to bring out the universality and
the omnipresence of the Supreme.

24 nabhahsprsam diptam anekavarnam
vyattananam diptavisalanetram
drsiva hi tod pravyathitantaraima
dhytimn na vindémi samam ca visno

(24) When I see Thee touching the sky, blazing with many
hues, with the mouth opened wide, and large glowing eyes,
my inmost soul trembles in fear and I find neither steadiness
nor peace, O Visnu!

25 damstrakaralani ca te mukham
arstvai ’va kélénalasamnibhani
digo na jane na labhe ca Sarma
prasida devesa jagannivasa

(25) When I see Thy mouths terrible with their tusks, like
Time’s devouring flames, I lose sense of the directions and
find no peace. Be gracious, O Lord of gods, Refuge of the
worlds!

kélanala literally the doomsday fire.
Arjuna loses his bearings. The tremendous experience has in it
elements of astonishment, terror and rapture.

20 ami ca tuam dhytarastrasya putrah
sarve sahai ’va ’vanipalasamghaih
bhismo dronah siitaputvas tatha 'sau
saha ’smadiyair api yodhamukhyaih

(26) All yonder sons of Dhrtarastra together with the hosts
of kings and also Bhisma, Drona and Karna along with the
chief warriors on our side too,278 The Bhagavadgita

27° vaktrani te tvaramana visant
damsirakardlani bhayanakani
hecia vilagnd dasanantaresu
samdrsyante cirnitair utiamangath

(27) Are rushing into Thy fearful mouths set with terrible
tusks. Some caught between the teeth are seen with their
heads crushed to powder.

28 yatha nadinam bahavo ’mbuvegah
samudram eva ’bhimukha dravanti
tatha tava ’mi naralokavira
visanti vaktrany abhivijvalanh

(28) As the many rushing torrents of rivers race towards
the ocean, so do these heroes of the world of men rush into
Thy flaming mouths.

29. yatha pradiptam jvalanam patanga
visantt nasaya samyddhavegah
tathai ’va naSéya visanti lokas
tava "pi vaktrani samrddhavegah

(29) As moths rush swiftly into a blazing fire to perish there,
so do these men rush into Thy mouths with great speed to
their own destruction.

These beings blinded by their own ignorance are rushing to
their destruction and the Divine Controller permits it, as they
are carrying out the effects of their own deeds. When we will
a deed, we will its consequences also. The free activities subject
us to their results. As this law of cause and consequence is an
expression of the Divine mind, the Divine may be said to execute
the law. The writer points out through the conception of world-
form how the whole cosmos with its vastness, beauty and terror,
gods, blessed souls, animals, plants are all there in the plenitude
of God’s life. God cannot move outside Himself, having all within
Himself. We, human beings, who think discursively, are occupied,
now with one object and now with another. We think con-
secutively but the Divine mind knows all as one. There is no past
to it nor future.XI. The Lord’s Transfiguration 279

30 lelihyase grasamanah samantal
lokaén samagran vadanair jualadbhih
lejobhir apiirya jagat samagram
bhasas tavo ’grah pratapanti visno

(30) Devourirg all the worlds on every side with Thy
flaming mouths, thou lickest them up. Thy fiery rays fill
this whole universe and scorch it with their fierce radiance,
O Visnu!

31 akhyahi me ko bhavan ugrariipo
namo ‘stu te devavara prasida
vijhatum iccham bhavantam adyam

nahi prajanam ava pravrtiim
(31) Tell me who Thou art with form so terrible. Salutation
to Thee, O Thou Great Godhead, have mercy. I wish to
know Thee (who art) the Primal One, for I know not Thy
working

The disciple seeks for deeper knowledge.

God as the Judge

Svibhagavan uvaca
32 kalo sm lokaksayakrt pravrddho
lokan sama artum cha pr..uritah
re pi tuam na bhavisyanti sarve
ve 'vasthitah pratyantk.su yodhah
The Blessed Lord said:
(32) Time am I, world-destroying, grown mature, engaged
here in subduing the world. Even without thee (thy
action), all the warriors standing arrayed in the opposing
armies shall cease to be

Kala or time is the prime mover of the universe. If God is
thought of as time, then"He is perpetually creating and destroying.
Time is the streaming flux which moves unceasingly.

The Supreme Being takes up the responsibility for both creation
and destruction. The Git@ does not countenance the familiar280 The Bhagavadgita

doctrine that, while God is responsible for all that is good, Satan
is responsible for all that is evil. If God is responsible for mortal
existence, then He is responsible for all that it includes, life and
creation, anguish and death.

God has control over time because He is outside of it and we
also shall obtain power over time if we rise above it. As the force
behind this, He sees farther than we, knows how all events are
controlled and so tells Arjuna that causes have been at work for
years and are moving towards their natural effects which we
cannot prevent by anything we can do now. The destruction of
his enemies is decided irrevocably by acts committed long ago.
There is an impersonal fate, what the Christians call Providence,
a general cosmic necessity, moira, which is an expression of a
side of God’s nature and so can be regarded as the will of His
sovereign personality, which pursues its own unrecognizable aims.
Against it, all protestations of self-determination are of no avail.

33. tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
Jitva Satriin bhunksva rajyam samrddham

mayai vai ’.e nihatah pirvam eva

nimittamatram bhava savyasacin

(33) Therefore arise thou and gain glory. Conquering thy
foes, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. By Me alone are they
slain already. Be thou merely the occasion, O Savyasacin
(Arjuna).

The God of destiny decides and ordains all things and Arjuna
is to be the instrument, the flute under the fingers of the Omni-
potent One who fulfils His own purpose and is working out a
mighty evolution. Arjuna is self-deceived if he believes that he
should act according to his own imperfect judgment. No indi-
vidual soul can encroach on the prerogative of God. In refusing
to take up arms, Arjuna is guilty of presumption. See XVIII, 58.

nimittamdatram: merely the occasion. The writer seems to uphold
the doctrine of Divine predestination and indicate the utter help-
lessness and insignificance of the individual and the futility of
his will and effort. The decision is made already and Arjuna can
do nothing to change it. He is a powerless tool in God’s hands,
and yet there is the other note that God is not arbitrary and
capricious but just and loving. How are the two to be reconciled?XI. The Lord's Transfiguration 281

The numinous idea of the predestinating and solely acting God
which induces in us the feeling of the utter dependence on God,
the “wholly other” standing over against us in 2’ solute anti-
thesis, is here expressed. The intense intuition of the power of
God comes out here and in Job and in Paul: “Shall the thing
formed say to Him that formed it, why hast thou made me thus?”

We need not look upon the whole cosmic process as nothing
more than the unfolding of a predetermined plan, the unveiling
of a ready-made scenario. The writer here is not so much denying
the unforeseeableness of human acts as affirming the meaning
of eternity in which all the moments of the whole of time, past,
present and future, are present to the Divine Spirit. The radical
novelty of each moment of evolution in time is not inconsistent
with Divine Eternity.

The ideas of God are worked out through human instrumen-
tality. If we are wise, we so act that we are instruments in His
hands. We allow Him to absorb our soul and leave no trace of
the ego. We must receive His command and do His will with
the cry “In thy will is our peace”; “Father, into Thy hands I
commend my Spirit.”* Arjuna should feel, “Nothing exists save
Thy will. Thou alone art the doer and I am only the instrument.”
The dread horror of the war repels him. Judged by human
standards, it is quite incomprehensible but when the curtain is
lifted, so as to reveal the purpose of the Almighty, he acquiesces
in it. What he himself desired, what he might hope to gain in
this world or the next do not count any more. Behind this world
of space-time, interpenetrating it, is the creative purpose of God.
‘We must understand that supreme design and be content to
serve it. Every act is a symbol of something far beyond itself.

34 dronam ca bhismam ca jayadratham ca
karnam tatha 'nyan api yodhaviran
maya hatdns tvarn jahi ma vyathistha

yudhyasva jetasi rane sapatnan
(34) Slay Drona, Bhisma, Jayadratha, Karna and other
great warriors as well, who are already doomed by Me.
Be not afraid. Fight, thou shalt conquer the enemies in
battle.

* Luke xxiii, 46.282 The Bhagavadgita

maya hatin: doomed by me. God knows the direction of their
lives and their appointed goal. There is nothing however small
or insignificant that has not been ordained or permitted by God,
even to the fall of a sparrow.

Arjuna is asked to assume the office of Providence. He will be
externally master of nature and inwardly superior to all possible
accidents.

Santjaya uvaca
35 etac chrutva vacanam kesavasya
kytanjalir vepamanah kiritt
namaskytva bhitya eva ’ha krsnam
sagadgadam: bhitabhitah pranamya
Sarijaya said:
(35) Having. heard this utterance of KeSava (Krsna),
Kiritin (Arjuna), with folded hands and trembling, saluted
again and prostrating himself with great fear, spoke in a
faltering voice to Krsna.
Rudolf Otto gives this whole scene as an example of the place

of the numinous, the mysterium tremendum in religion. It presents
to us the transcendent aspect of God.

Arjuna’s Hymn of Praise

arjuna uvaca
36 sthane hrsikesa tava prakirtya
jagat prahrsyaty anurajyate ca
raksamsi bhttani digo dravanti
sarve namasyanti ca siddhasamghah
Arjuna said:
(36) O HrisikeSa (Krsna), rightly does the world rejoice
and delight in glorifying Thee. The Raksasas are fleeing
in terror in all directions and all the hosts of perfected ones
are bowing down before Thee (in adoration).
In an ecstasy of adoration and anguish, Arjuna praises the
Supreme. He sees not only the destructive power of Time but
also the spiritual presence and law governing the cosmos. WhileXI. The Lord’s Transfiguration 283

the former produces terror, the latter gives rise to a sense of
rapturous ecstasy and he pours forth his soul in utter adoration.

37 kasmdac ca te na nameran mahatman
gariyase brahmano "py Gdikartre
ananta deveSa jagannivasa
tvam aksavamn sad asat tatparam yat

(37) And why should they not do Thee homage, O Exalted
One, who art greater than Brahma, the original creator? O
Infinite Being, Lord of the gods, Refuge of the universe,
Thou art the Imperishable, the being and the non-being
and what is beyond that.

adikarty: Thou art the first creator, or Thou art the creator
even of Brahma.

jagannivdsa: the Refuge of the universe. The God in whom
dwells the universe.

38 wam adidevah purusah puranas
team asya vi8vasya param nidhanam
veita 'si vedyam ca param ca dhama
tvayd tatam visvam anantariipa

(38) Thou art the First of gods, the Primal Person, the
Supreme Resting Place of the world. Thou art the knower
and that which is to be known and the supreme goal. And
by Thee is this universe pervaded, O Thou of infinite form!

39 vdyur yamo 'gnir varunah Sasankah
prajapatis tvam prapitamahas ca
namo namas te ’'stu sahasrakytvah

punas ca bhiyo ’pi namo namas te
(39) Thou art Vayu (the wind), Yama (the destroyer),
Agni (the fire), Varuna (the sea-god) and Saganka (the moon),
and Prajapati, the grandsire (of all). Hail, hail to Thee, a
thousand times. Hail, hail to Thee again and yet again.

According to some, ‘‘Prajapati and the grandsire of all.”284 The Bhagavadgita
40 namah purastad atha prsthatas te
namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva
anantaviryamitavikramas team
sarvam samapnost tato ’si sarvah

(40) Hail to Thee in front, (hail) to Thee behind and hail to
Thee on every side, O All; boundless in power and immeasur-
able in might, Thou dost penetrate all and therefore Thou
art All

The Supreme dwells everywhere, within, without, above, below
and around and there is no place where He is not. See Mundaka
Up., IL. 2. 11; Chandogya Up., VII. 25

The truth that we are all the creatures of the One Supreme and
that He is in each and every one of us is frequently repeated.

41 sakhe 't matva prasabham yad uktam
he krsna he yadava he sakhe 'ta
ajanata mahimanam tave dam

maya pramadat pranayena va 'pi
(41) For whatsoever I have spoken in rashness to Thee,
thinking that Thou art my companion and unaware of this
(fact of) Thy greatness, “‘O Krsna, O Yadava, O Comrade”;
out of my negligence or may be through fondness,

tavedam Another reading is tavemam.

42 yac ca vahdsartham asatkrio si
viharasayyasanabhojanesu
eho 'thava 'py acyuta tatsamaksam
tat ksamaye tuam aham apramey:im

(42) And for whatsoever disrespect was shown to Thee in
jest, while at play or on the bed or seated or at meals, either
alone or in the presence of others, I pray, O Unshaken One,
forgiveness from Thee, the Immeasurable

The vision of God produces a deep sense of unworthiness and
sin. When Isaiah saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and
lifted up, he said, “Woe is me! For I am undone; because 1 am
a man of unclean lips, . . . for mine eyes have seen the King, the
Lord of Hosts.” (vi, z, 5.)XI. The Lovd’s Transfiguratson 285

43 pitd st lokasya caracarasya
tuam asya piljyas ca gurur gariyan
na tvatsamo ‘sty abhyadhikah kuto ‘nyo
lokatraye ‘py apratimaprabhava

(43) Thou art the father of the world of the moving and the
unmoving. Thou art the object of its worship and its
venerable teacher. None is equal to Thee, how then could
there be one greater than Thee in the three worlds, O Thou
of incomparable greatness?

44 tasmat pranamya pramdhaya kaya
prasadaye tvam aham igam idyam

pite va putrasya sakhe 'va sakhyuh
briyah priyaya ‘rhasi deva sodhum

(44) Therefore bowing down and prostrating my body before
Thee, Adorable Lord, I seek Thy grace. Thou, O God,
shouldst bear with me as a father to his son, as a friend to
his friend, as a lover to his beloved.

The Supreme is not to be regarded as a transcendent mystery
but also as close to us, as close as a father is to the son, as a friend
to the friend or as a lover to the beloved. These human relations
find in God their fullest realization and later Vaisnava literature
utilizes these ideas more fully.

God as Father is a familiar conception to the Hindu. Rg. Veda
says: “Be of easy approach to us, even as a father to his son.
Do thou, O Self-effulgent Lord, abide with us and bring blessings
to us.” Again, Yajur Veda says: “O Lord, thou art our father;
do thou instruct us like a father.”? The Old Testament uses the
image of the father. “Like as a father pitieth his children, so the
Lord pitieth them that fear him.”3 The idea of God as father
becomes the central conception in the teaching of Jesus.

45 adrstapirvam hrsiio smi drstea
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano me
tad eva me darsaya deva riipam
prasida devesa jagannivasa

L149 - XXXVII 20,
3 Psalm ciii, 13. See also Ixviii, 5.286 The Bhagavadgita

(45) I have seen what was never seen before and I rejoice
but my heart is shaken with fear. Show me that other
(previous) form of Thine, O God and be gracious, O Lord
of the gods and Refuge of the Universe!

There is not only the form of the Transcendent and Universal
Being which is so terrifying in some of its aspects but also the
form of Personal God, a mediating symbol of Godhead which is
so reassuring to the terrified mortal. Arjuna, who is unable to
stand the blinding blaze of light that devastates Krsna’s whole
being, wishes to see the more pleasing form. The Light which for
ever shines beyond the worlds is also the Light within, the teacher
and friend in his own heart.

46 hiritinars gadinam cakrahastam
icchami tuam drastum aham tathat ‘va
tenai va riipena caturbhujena
sahasrabaho bhava visvamiirte

(46) I wish to see Thee even as before with Thy crown,
mace, and disc in Thy hand. Assume Thy four-armed shape,
O Thou of a thousand arms and of universal form.

Arjuna is asking Krsna to assume the shape of Visnu of whom
He is said to be an incarnation.

The Lord’s Grace and Assurance

Sribhagavan uvaca
47 maya prasannena tava 'rjunz'dam
ripam param darsitam atmayogat
tejomayam visvam anantam adyant
yan me tvadanyena na drstapitrvam
The Blessed Lord said:
(47) By My grace, through My divine power; O Arjuna, was
shown to thee this supreme form, luminous, universal,
infinite and primal which none but thee has seen before

This vision is not the final goal of man’s search; in that case
the Gia would have ended here. The fleeting vision must becomeXI The Lord's Transfiguration 287

« perinanent experience of the seeker. Trance or samadhi is
neither the end nor an essential element of religious life. The
blinding flashes, the ecstatic flights must be transmuted into
permanent faith. Arjuna cannot any more forget the thrilling
scene he saw but he has to work it into his life. The vision only
opens; it does not enhance. Even as we test and confirm what
we see by the eye, by the evidence of other senses, the knowledge
acquired by the vision requires to be completed by the other
elements of life.

48 na vedayajnadhyayanair na danair
na ca kriyabhir na tapobhir ugraih
evamripah sakya aham nloke

drastum tvadanyena kurupravira
(48) Neither by the Vedas, (nor by) sacrifices nor by study
nor by gifts nor by ceremonial rites nor by severe austerities
can I with this form be seen in the world of men by any
one else but thee, O hero of the Kurus (Arjuna)

49. ma te vyatha ma ca vimiidhabhavo
dystua riipam ghoram idyn mame dam
vyapetabhih pritamanah punas tvan
tad eva me riipam idam prapasya

(49) May you not be afraid, may you not be bewildered
seeing this terrific form of Mine. Free from fear and glad at
heart, behold again this other (former) form of Mine.

sanyaya wodca
50 ity arjunam vasudevas tatho 'ktud
svakam ripam darsayam asa bhityah
asvasayam asa ca bhitam enam
bhiitvd punah saumyavapur mahatma
Samjaya said:

(5c) Having thus spoken to Arjuna, Vasudeva (Krsna)
revealed to him again: His own form. The Exalted One,

having assumed again the form of grace, comforted the
terrified Arjuna288 The Bhagavadgita
arjuna uvaca
51 drstve ’dam manusam ritpant
tava saumyam janardana
idanim asmi samvritah
sacetah prakrtim gatah
Arjuna said:

(51) Beholding again this Thy gracious human form, O
Janardana (Krsna), I have now become collected in mind
and am restored to my normal nature.

Sribhagavan uvaca
52. sudurdarsam idam riipam
dystavan asi yan mama
deva apy asya riipasya
nityam darsanakanksinah
The Blessed Lord said:
(52) This form of Mine which is indeed very hard to see,
thou hast seen. Even the gods are ever eager to see this form.

53. nd ‘hari vedair na tapasa
na dénena na ce ’jyaya
Sakya evamvidho drastum
dystavan asi mam yatha
(53) In the form in which thou hast seen Me now, I cannot
be seen either by the Vedas or by austerities or by gifts or
by sacrifices.

This verse is a repetition of XI, 48.

54 bhaktyd tv ananyaya Sakya
aham evamvidho 'rjuna

Giatum drastum ca tativena

pravestum ca paramiapa

(54) But by unswerving devotion to Me, O Arjuna, I can
‘be thus known, truly seen and entered into, O Oppressor of
the foe (Arjuna)XI. The Lord's Transfiguration 289

§. defines an ideal devotee as one who, realizes by all the
senses only one object, God." He adores God with all his spirit
and heart.

Saksatkava or the direct perception of the divine form is
possible for the true devotees.

55 matkarmakrn matparamo
madbhaktah sangavarjitah
nirvairah sarvabhitesu
yah sa mam eti pandava

(55): He who does work for Me, he who looks upon Me as
his goal, he who worships Me, free from attachment, he who
is free from enmity to all creatures, he goes to Me, O
Pandava (Arjuna).

This is the essence of bhakti. See XII, 13. This verse is the
substance of the whole teaching of the Gi#a.3 We must carry out
our duties, directing the spirit to God and with detachment from
all interest in the things of the world and free from enmity
towards any living being.

Whatever be our vocation and character, whether we are
creative thinkers or contemplative poets or humble men and
women with no special gifts, if we possess the one great gift of
the love of God, we become God’s tools, the channels of His love
and purpose. When this vast world of living spirits becomes
attuned to God and exists only to do His will, the purpose of
man is achieved.

The Gita does not end after the tremendous experience of the
celestial vision. The great secret of the Transcendental Atman, the
source of all that is and yet itself unmoved for ever is seen. The
Supreme is the background for the never-ending procession of finite
things. Arjuna has seen this truth but he has to live in it by
transmuting his whole nature into the willing acceptance of the
Divine. A fleeting vision, however vivid and permanent its effects

' sarvair api haranaih vasudevdd anyan nopalabhyate yaya sd
ananya bhaktih.

+ madbhaktah mdm eva sarvaprakaraih, sarvatmand, sarvotsdhena
bhajate. §.

3 gitasastrasya srabhiito'rthah.290 The Bhagavadgita

may be, isnot complete attainment. The search for abiding reality,
the quest of final truth cannot end, in emotional satisfaction or
fitful experience.

itt... visvaritpadar anayogo nadmat 'kadaso 'dhykyah

This is the eleventh chapter entitled The Vision of the
Cosmic Form,CHAPTER XII

Worship of the Personal Lord is better than meditation
of the Absolute

Devotion and Contemplation

arjuna uvaca
I. evarh satatayukta ye
bhakias tuam paryupasate
ye ca py aksaram avyaktam
tesam ke yogavitiamah

Arjuna said:
(t) Those devotees who, thus ever earnest, worship Thee
and those again (who worship) the Imperishable and the
Unmanifested, which of these have the greater knowledge of
yoga?

There are those who seek oneness with the Absolute, one and
impersonal and unrelated to the universe, and others who seek
unity with the Personal God manifested in the world of men and
nature. Which of these have the greater yoga knowledge? Are
we to turn our back on all manifestations and strain after the
Unchanging Unmanifest or are we to be devoted to the Manifested
Form and work in Its service? Is it Absolute or the Personal
God, Brahman or Iévara that we should worship?

Sribhagavan uvaca
2. mayy avesya mano ye mam
nityayukta updsate
Sraddhaya parayo ’petas
te me yuktatama matah

The Blessed Lord said:

(2) Those who fixing their minds on Me worship Me, ever
earnest and possessed of supreme faith—them do I con-
sider most perfect in yoga.292 The Bhagavadgita

The teacher answers decisively that those, who worship God
in His manifested form, have greater yoga knowledge.

Updsana is worship.*

3. ye tu aksaram anirdesyam
avyaktam paryupasate
Sarvatragam acintyam ca
kittastham acalam dhruvam

(3) But those who worship the Imperishable, the Undefinable,
the Unmanifested, the Omnipresent, the Unthinkable, the
Unchanging and the Immobile, the Constant.

4 samniyamye 'ndriyagramam
sarvatra samabuddhayah
te prapnuvanti mam eva
sarvabhiitahite ratah

(4) By restraining all the senses, being even-minded in all
conditions, rejoicing in the welfare of all creatures, they
come to Me indeed (just like the others)

sammiyamya: restraining. We are asked to restrain the senses
and not to reject them.

sarvabhitahite ratah: rejoicing in the welfare of all creatures,
Even those who realize their oneness with the Universal Self, so
long as they wear a body, work for the welfare of the world.
See V, 25, where the liberated are said to rejoice in the welfare
of all creatures.

Here service of humanity is declared to be an essential part
of the discipline. M.B. has the following prayer: ““O who would
tell me of the sacred way by which I might enter into all the
suffering hearts and take all their suffering on myself for now
and for ever.”

Cp. also Tukéram:

‘That man is true
Who taketh to his bosom the afflicted:

1 Upasana is continuous meditation. §. says: updsanart ndma
yatha Sastram updsyasya arthasya visayikaranena samipyam upagamya
tailadharavat sama@napratyayapravahena dirghakalam yad dsanam,
tad upasanam acaksate.XII. Worship of the Personal Lord and of the Absolute 293

In such a man

Dwelleth, augustly present,

God Himself;

The heart of such a man is filled abrim
With pity, gentleness and love;

He taketh the forsaken for his own.’*

5. Rleso 'dhikataras tesam
avyaktasaktacetasam
avyakta hi gatir duhkham
dehavadbhir avapyate

(5) The difficulty of those whose thoughts are set on the
Unmanifested is greater, for the goal of the Unmanifested
is hard to reach by the embodied beings.

Search for the Transcendent Godhead is more difficult than
worship of the Living Supreme God, the soul of all things and
persons. In the Avadhiitagita, Dattatreya asks: “How can I bow
to Him who is formless, undifferentiated, blissful and indes-
tructible, who has through Himself and by Himself and in Him-
self filled up everything ?”’2 The Immutable does not offer an easy
hold to the mind and the path is more arduous. We reach the
same goal more easily and naturally by the path of devotion
to the Personal God, by turning godward all our energies, know-
ledge, will and feeling. Cp. “With minds rapt in meditation, if
mystics see the unqualified actionless light, let them see. As for
myself, my only yearning is that there may appear before my
gladdened eyes that bluish someone who keeps romping on the
shores of the yamuna.”3

M. K. Gandhi: Songs from Prison (1934), p. 129.
2 yenedarh pitritars sarvam atmanaivatmandtmani
nirBkBram katharh vande abhinnarh sivam avyayam
Cf. St. John of Damascus. “By the visible aspect our thoughts must
be be rasa up in a spiritual fight and rise to the invisible majesty

3 dhyandvasthita tad gatena manasa tan nirgunarh niskriyam
Jyotil, hivicana yogino yadi punah pasyanti pasyantu te
asmahkar tu tad eva locanacamathdraya bhityac ciram
Aalindipulinesu yat kim api tan nilam tamo dhdvats.204 ‘The Bhagavadgita
Different Approaches

6. ye tu sarvam karmani
mayt sannyasya matparah
ananyenai ’va yogena
mam dhyayania upasate

(6) But those, who, laying all their actions on Me, intent
on Me, worship, meditating on Me, with unswerving
devotion,

7. tesim aham samuddharta
mytyusamsarasagarat
bhavami nacivat partha
mayy aveSsitacetasam

(7) These whose thoughts are set on Me, I straightway
deliver from the ocean of death-bound existence, O Partha
(Arjuna).

God is the deliverer, the saviour. When we set our hearts and
minds on Him, He lifts us from the sea of death and secures for
us a place in the eternal. For one whose nature is not steeped
in vairagya or renunciation, the path of devotion is more suitable.
The Bhagavata says: “The path of devotion is most suitable
for him who is neither very tired of nor very attached to the
world.”: It is a matter of temperament whether we adopt the
pravrtti dharma, the path of works, or nivrttidharma, the path
of renunciation.

8 mayy eva mana adhatsva
mayt buddhirna nivesaya
mivasisyasi mayy eva
ata urdhvar na sarnfayah

(8) On Me alone fix thy mind, let thy understanding dwell
in Me. In Me alone shalt thou live thereafter. Of this there
is no doubt.

* na nirvinyo natisakto bhaktryogo’sya siddhidah. XI, 20, 7.XU. Worship of the Personal Lord and of the Absolute 295

9 atha critam samadhatum
na Saknosi mayt sthiram
abhydsayogena tato
mam iccha 'ptum dhananyjaya
(9) If, however, thou art not able to fix thy thought steadily
on Me, then seek to reach Me by the practice of concen-
tration, O Winner of wealth (Arjuna).

If this spiritual condition does not arise spontaneously, we
must take up the practice of concentration, so that we may
gradually fit ourselves for the steadfast directing of the spirit
to God. By this practice, the Divine takes gradual possession of
our nature.

10. abhydse ’py asamartho ‘st
matkarmaparamo bhava
madartham api karmani
kurvan siddhim avapsyasi
(to) If thou art unable even to seek by practice, then be
as one whose supreme aim is My service; even performing
actions for My sake, thou shalt attain perfection.

If concentration is found difficult on account of the outward
tendencies of the mind or our circumstances, then do all actions
for the sake of the Lord. Thus the individual becomes aware of
the eternal reality.

matkarma is sometimes taken to mean service of the Lord,
pija or worship, offering flowers and fruits, burning incense,
building temples, reading scriptures, etc.'

Il. athar tad apy asakto ‘st
kartum madyogam asritah
sarvakarmaphalatyagam
‘aah kuru yatatmavan
(tz) If thou art not able to do even this, then taking refuge
in My disciplined activity, renounce the fruit of all action,
with the self subdued
madyogam asritah: taking refuge in my wondrous power.—
Sridhara.
Abhinavagupta regards matkarmani as equivalent to bhagavat
harmani as puja, japa, svadhyaya, homa, etc.296 The Bhagavadgita

If you cannot dedicate all your works to the Divine, then do
the work without desire of the fruit, Adopt the yoga of desireless
action, niskamakarma. We can renounce all personal striving,
resign ourselves completely and solely to God’s saving power,
submit to self-discipline and work, abandoning all thought of
reward. One must become like a child in the hands of the Divine.

12. Sreyo hi jianam abhyasaj
jhanad dhyanam visisyate
dhyanat karmaphalatyagas
tyagac chantir anantaram
(12) Better indeed is knowledge than the practice (of con-
centration); better than knowledge is meditation; better
than meditation is the renunciation of the fruit of action;
on renunciation (follows) immediately peace.

Sridhara interprets jfidina as dvesa or directing the spirit towards
God and dhyana as being full of God, bhagavanmayatuam, and
this is completed in the spirit’s full possession of God Himself.
Cp. Stirya Gita: “Devotion is better than knowledge and desire-
less action is better than devotion. He who realizes this principle
of Vedanta is to be regarded as the best man.” Devotion, medi-
tation and concentration are more difficult than renunciation of
the fruits of action, karmaphalatyaga. This latter destroys the
sources of unrest and brings about an inner calm and peace,
which are the very foundations of spiritual life. The bhakti
emphasis leads to the subordination of knowledge and meditation
to the devout mind and consecration of all works to God.

The True Devotee

13. advesta sarvabhiitanim
maitrah karuna eva ca
nirmamo nirahamkarah
samaduhkhasukhah ksami
(13) He who has no ill will to any being, who is friendly
and compassionate, free from egoism and self-sense, even-
minded in pain and pleasure and patient.
1 jhandd updstir uthy sta karmothystam upasanat
iti yo veda vedantaih sa eva purusottamah. 114, 77-XII. Worship of the Personal Lord and of the Absolute 297

14. samtustah satatam yogi
yatatma drdhamscayah
mayy arpitamanobuddhir
yo madbhaktah sa me priyah
(14) The Yogi who is ever content, self-controlled, un-
shakable in determination, with mind and understanding
given up to Me—he, My devotee, is dear to Me.
In these verses the Gita mentions the qualities of a true devotee,
freedom of spirit, friendliness to all, patience and tranquillity.

15. yasman no 'dvijate loko
lokan no ’dvijate ca yah
harsimarsabhayodvegatr
‘ mukto yah sa ca me priyah
(15) He from whom the world does not shrink and who does
not shrink from the world and who is free from joy and anger,
fear and agitation, he too is dear to Me.

He is not a source of grief to any; no one can make him feel
grief.
16. anapeksah Sucir daksa
uddsino gatavyathah
sarvarambhaparityagt ,
yo madbhaktah sa me priyah
(x6) He who has no expectation, is pure, skilful in action,
unconcerned, and untroubled, who has given up all initiative
(in action), he, My devotee, is dear to Me.
He renounces the fruits of all his actions. His acts are skilled,
daksa, pure and passionless. He does not lose himself in reverie
or dream but knows his way in the world.

17 yo na hysyati na dvestt
na Socati na kanksati
Subhasubhaparityagt
bhaktiman yah sa me priyah
(27) He who neither rejoices nor hates, neither grieves nor
desires, and who has renounced good and evil, he who is
thus devoted is dear to Me.298 The Bhagavadgita

18. samah Satrau ca mitre ca
tatha mandpamanayoh

Sttosnasukhaduhkhesu
amah sangavivarjitah

(18) He who (behaves) alike to foe and friend, also to good
and evil repute and who is alike in cold and heat, pleasure
and pain and who is free from attachment

samah Satrau ca mitre ca. Cp. Jesus. “He maketh his sun to
rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the just and
the unjust.”

1g. .ulyanindastutir mauni
samtusto yena kenactt
aniketah sthiramatir
bhaktiman me priyo narah

(9) He who holds equal blame and praise, who is silent
(restrained in speech), content with anything (that comes),
who has no fixed abode and is firm in mind, that man who is
devoted is dear to Me

aniketah: no fixed abode, homeless. Though he fulfils all social
duties, he is not tied to any family or home. As these souls exist,
not for this family or that social group but live for mankind as a
whole, they do not have a settled home. They are free to move
wherever their inspiration takes them. They are not chained to
one place or confined to one community. They are not tied to the
past or obliged to defend an unchangeable authority The welfare
of humanity as a whole is their constant concern. These sarinyasins
may appear in any social group. Cp. M.B.: “He who is clothed
with anything, whois fed on any food, who lies down anywhere
him the gods call a Brahmin.”?

1 Matthew v, 45.
2 yenakenacid Acchanno, yenakenacid asitah,
yatra kvacana Sayi syai tam devah brahmanam viduh.
Santiparva 245, 12.
See also Vignu Purana. III. 7. 20.
na calati nijavarnadharmato yah samamati}, atmasuhyid vipaksa pakse
na harati na ca hanti kifciduccaih stiamanasam tam avehi visnu-
bhaktam.XII. Worship of the Personal Lord and of the Absolute 299

20. ye tu dharmyamrtam idam
yathoktam paryupasate
Sraddadhana matparama
bhaktas te ’tiva me priyah

(20) But those who with faith, holding Me as their supreme
aim, follow this immortal wisdom, those devotees are
exceedingly dear to Me.

Sraddadhana: (those) with faith. Before the experience arises
the soul must have faith, which carries with it consent of mind
and life. For those who have experience, it is a matter of sight:
tor others, it is faith, a call or a compulsion.

When we see the One Self in all things, equal-mindedness,
freedom from selfish desires, surrender of our whole nature to
the Indwelling Spirit and love for all arise. When these qualities
are manifested, our devotion is perfect and we are God’s own
men. Our life then is guided not by the forces of attraction and
repulsion, friendship and enmity, pleasure and pain, but by the
single urge to give oneself to God and therefore to the service
of the world which is one with God.t

iti . . . bhaktiyogo ndma dvadaso 'dhyayah
This is the twelfth chapter entitled The Yoga of Devotion.

In the words of Tulsidas:
“Grant me, O Master, by thy grace
To follow all the good and pure,
To be content with simple things;
To use my fellows not as means but ends
To serve them stalwartly, in thought, word, deed;
Never to utter word of hatred or of shame:
To cast away all selfishness and pride:
To speak no ill of others:
To have a mind at peace,
Set free from care, and led astray from thee
Neither by happiness nor woe;
Set thou my feet upon this path,
And keep me steadiast in it,
‘Thus only shall I please thee, serve thee right.”
M. K. Gandhi: Songs from Prison (1934), p. 52.CHAPTER XIII

The Body called the Field, the Soul called the Knower
of the Field and Discrimination between them

The Field and the Knower of the Field

arjuna uvaca
prakrtin purusam caiva
ksetram ksetrajham eva ca
etad veditum icchami
‘itdnam jheyam ca keSava

Arjuna said.
Prakrti and purusa, the field and the knower of the field,
knowledge and the object of knowledge, these I should like
to know, O Keéava (Krsna)

This verse is not found in some editions. $. does not comment:
on it. If it is included, the total number of verses in the Bhaga-
vadgita will be 701 and not 700, which is the number traditionally
accepted. So we do not include it in the numbering of verses.

Sribhagavan uvaca
1 idam Sariram kaunteya
hsetram ity abhidhiyate
elad yo vetti tam prahuh
ksetrajha iti tadvidah

The Blessed Lord said:
(1) This body, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), is called the field
and him who knows this, those who know thereof call the
knower of the field

Prakrti is unconscious activity and purusa is inactive con-
sciousness. Thé body is called the field in which events happen;
all growth, decline and death take place in it. The conscious
principle, inactive and detached, which lies behind all active
states as witness, is the knower of the field. This is the familiarXIII. The Field and Its Knower 302

distinction between. consciousness and the objects which that
consciousness observes. Ksetrajfia is the light of awareness, the
knower of all objects.! The witness is not the individual embodied
mind but the cosmic consciousness for which the whole cosmos
is the object. It is calm and eternal and does not need the use
of the senses and the mind for its witnessing.

Ksetrajfia is the supreme lord, not an object in the world.
He is in all fields, differentiated by the limiting conditions, from
Brahmi, the creator, to a tuft of grass though he is himself devoid
of all limitations and incapable of definition by categories.* The
immutable consciousness is spoken of as cognizer only figuratively
(upacarat).

‘When we try to know the nature of the human soul, we may
get to know it from above or from below, from the divine principle
or the elemental nature. Man is a twofold, contradictory being,
free and enslaved. He is godlike, and has in him the signs of his
fall, that is, descent into nature. As a fallen being, man is deter-
mined by the forces of prakrti. He appears to be actuated solely
by elemental forces, sensual impulses, fear and anxiety. But
man desires to get the better of his fallen nature. The man studied
by objective sciences as biology, psychology and sociology is a
natural being, is the product of the processes which take place
in the world. But man, as a subject, has another origin. He is
not a child of the world. He is not nature. He does not belong
to the objective hierarchy of nature, as a subordinate part of it.
Purusa or ksetrajiia cannot be recognized as an object among
other objects or as a substance. He can only be recognized as
subject, in which is hidden the secret of existence, a complete
universe in an individual form. He is not therefore a part of the
world or of any other whole. As an empirical being he may be
like a Leibnitian monad closed, shut up without doors or windows.
As a subject he enters into infinity and infinity enters into him.
Ksetrajfia is the universal in an individually unrepeatable form.
The human being is a union of the universal-infinite and the
universal-particular. In his subjective aspects, he is not a part of

1 See also Svetdsvatara Up., VI, 16; and Maitrayani Up., Il, 5.

2 hsetvajiiarh man paramesvaram asamsdrinarn viddhi janithi sar-
vakseivesu yah. ksetrajnah brahmadistambaparyantaneha ksetropadhi-
pravibhakiarh tam nirastasarvopadhibhedam sadasadadisabdapratya-
yagocaram viddht. §.302 The Bhagavadgita

a whole but is the potential whole. To actualize it, to accomplish
the universality is the ideal of man. The subject fills itself with
universal content—achieves unity in wholeness at the end of its
journey. Man’s peculiarity is not the possession of the common
pattern of two eyes and two hands, but the possession of the
inward principle which impels the creative acquisition of a quali-
tative content of life. He has a unique quality, which is non-
common. The ideal personality is unique and unrepeatable. Each
person at the end of the road becomes a distinct, unrepeatable,
unreplaceable being with a unique form.

2. ksetrajham capi mam viddht
sarvaksetresu bharata
ksetvaksetrajiayor jnanam
yat taj jnanam matam mama

(2) Know Me as the Knower of the field in all fields, O
Bharata (Arjuna). The knowledge of the field and its knower,
do I regard as true knowledge.

S. holds that the Supreme Lord seems to be sarhsarin, by reason
of the cosmic manifestation, even as the individual self appears
to be bound by its identification with the body.: The Fall,
according to the Christian doctrine, is the forgetting of the image
of God within man, which is freedom, and lapsing into the external,
which is necessity. Man, essentially, is not a part of nature but
is spirit that interrupts the continuity of nature.

3. tat ksetram yac ca yddrk ca
yadvikari yatas ca yat
sa ca yo yatprabhavas ca
tat samdsena me Srnu
(3) Hear briefly from Me what the Field is, of what nature,

what its modifications are, whence it is, what he (the knower
of the field) is, and what his powers are.

* tatraivam sati hsetrajfiasyesvarasyawva sato'vidyakrtopadhibhedatah
samisdritvam iva bhavati yatha dehadyatmatuam atmanah.XIII. The Field and Its Knower 303
The Constituents of the Field

4. rsibhur bahudha gitam
chandobhir vividhaih prthak
brahmasiitrapadais cai 'va
hetumadbhir viniscitath
(4) This has been sung by sages in many ways and distinctly,
in various hymns and also in well-reasoned and conclusive
expressions of the aphorisms of the Absolute (brahmasiitra).

The Gita suggests that it is expounding the truths already
contained in the Vedas, the Upanisads and the Brahma Sttra or
the aphorisms of Brahman, later systematized by Badarayana.
The Vedic hymns are called chandas or rhythmical utterances.

5 mahabhiitiny ahamkaro
buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyani dasai ’kam ca
paica ce ndriyagocarah
(5) The great (five gross) elements, self-sense, understanding
as also the unmanifested, the ten senses and mind and the
five objects of the senses.

These are the constituents of the field of Ksetra, the contents
of experience, the twenty-four principles of the Sarhkhya system.
The distinction of mental and materiai belongs to the object side.
They are distinctions within the “field” itself.

The body, the forms of sense with which we identify the subject
belong to the object side. The ego is au artificial construction
obtained by abstraction from conscious experience. The witnessing
consciousness is the same whether it lights up the blue sky or
a red flower. Though the fields which are lit up may be different,
the light which illumines them is the same.

6 tccha dvesah sukhara duhkham
samghatas cetana dhrtih
etat ksetram samasena
savikaram udahytam
(6) Desire and hatred, pleasure and pain, the aggregate (the
organism), intelligence and steadfastness described, this in
brief is the field along with its modifications304 The Bhagavadgita

Even the mental traits are said to qualify the field because
they are objects of knowledge.

The knower is a subject and the turning of it into an object
or a thing means ignorance, avidy4. Objectivization is the ejection
of the subject into the world of the objects. Nothing in the object
world is an authentic reality. We can realize the subject in us
only by overcoming the enslaving power of the object world,
by refusing to be dissolved in it. This means resistance, suffering.
Acquiescence in the surrounding world and its conventions
diminishes suffering; refusal increases it. Suffering is the process
through which we fight for our true nature.

Knowledge

7 amanitvam adambhitvam
ahimmsa ksantir drjavam
acaryopasanam Saucarn
sthairyam atmavinigrahah
(7) Humility (absence of pride), integrity (absence of deceit),
non-violence, patience, uprightness, service of the teacher,
purity (of body and mind), steadfastness and self-control.

8. indriyarthesu vairagyam
anahamkara eva ca
janmamytyujaravydadhi-
duhkhadosanudarsanam
(8) Indifference to the objects of sense, self-effacement and

the perception of the evil of birth, death, old age, sickness
and pain.

9. asaktir anabhisvangah
putradaragrhadisu
nityam ca samacittatvam
tstanistopapattisu

(9) Non-attachment, absence of clinging to son, wife, home
and the like and a constant equal-mindedness to all desirable
and undesirable happenings.XII. The Field and Its Knower 305

10 mayt ca ’nanyayogena
bhakiir avyabhicarint
viviktadesasevitvam
aratiy janasamsadt
(ro) Unswerving devotion to Me with wholehearted dis-
cipline, resort to solitary places, dislike for a crowd of
people.
II adhyatmajnanamtyawam
tattvajnanarthadarsanam
etaj jndnam ui proktam
ajnanam yad ato ’nyatha
(tr) Constancy in the knowledge of the Spirit, insight into
the end of the knowledge of Truth—this is declared to be
(true) knowledge and all that is different from it is non-
knowledge.

It is clear from this list of qualities that jfiina or knowledge
includes the practice of the moral virtues. Mere theoretical
learning will not do. By the development of moral qualities the
light of the ever changeless Self witnessing all but attached to
none is discriminated from the passing forms and is no more
confused with them.

12 pheyam yat tat pravaksyami
yaj jnadtva 'mrtam asnute
anddimat param brahma
na sat tan nad ’sad ucyate
(zz) I will describe that which is to be known and by knowing
which life eternal is gained. It is the Supreme Brahman who
is beginningless and who is said to be neither existent nor
non-existent.

anadimat param: beginningless supreme. S.

anadi matparam: beginningless, ruled by Me. R.

It is eternal, lifted above all empirical oppositions of existence
and non-existence, beginning and end, and if we realize It, birth
and death happen to be mere outward events which do not touch
the eternity of the self.

\ ndyam dima pravacanena labhyo, na medhaya, na bahund srutena.
Katha Up., Il, 22; Mundaka Up., Ill, 2-3.306 The Bhagavadgita

The Knower of the Field

13. sarvatahpanipadam tat
sarvatoksisivomukham
sarvatahsrutimal loke
sarvam durtya listhat
(13) With his hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads
and faces on all sides, with ears on all sides, He dwells in
the world, enveloping all.

As the one subject of all objects of experience, He is said to
envelop all and have hands and feet, ears and eyes everywhere.
Without the seeing Light, there is no experience at all. As the
Supreme has the two aspects, the one of transcendence and
detachment and the other of immanence in each particular union
with the not-self, It is described in a series of paradoxes. He is
without and within, unmoving and moving, far away and near,
undivided and yet divided. M.B. says that when the self is asso-
ciated with the modes of nature, it is called ksetrajiia; when it
is released from these it is called the paramatman or the Supreme
Self

 

14. sarvendriyagunabhasam
sarvendriyavivarjitam
asaktam sarvabhre cai 'va

nirgunam gunabhokty ca
(14) He appears to have the qualities of all the senses and
yet is without (any of) the senses, unattached and vet sup-
porting all, free from the gunas (dispositions of prakrti) and
yet enjoying them.

This verse makes out that the Supreme is the mutable and the
immutable, the all and the one. He sees all but not with the
physical eye, He hears all but not with the physical ear, He knows
all but not with the limited mind. Cp. SvetaSvatara Up., II, 19,
“He sees without the eye, He hears without the ear.” The
immensity of the Supreme is brought out by the attribution of
qualities (adhyaropa) and denial (apavada).

¥ dima ksetvajia ity uktah samyuktah prakytai gunaw
tair eva tu uimrmukiah pavamatmety udahytah.
Sdantiparva, 187, 24.XIII. The Field and Its Knower 307

15 bahir antas ca bhiitanam
acaram caram eva ca
sitksmatuat tad avijieyam
diirastham ca 'nitke ca tat

(15) He is without and within all beings He is unmoving
as also moving. He is too subtle to be known. He is far away
and yet is He near

16 «uvibhaktam ca bhiitesu
vibhaktam tva ca sthitam
bhiitabharty ca taj jheyam
grasisnu prabhavisnu ca

(16) He is undivided (indivisible) and yet He scems to be
divided among beings. He is to be known as supporting
creatures, destroying them and creating them afresh.

Cp. Dionysius: “Undivided in things divided.” All things derive
from Him, are supported by Him and taken back into Him.

17. ,yotusdm apt 1aj zyotts
tamasah param ucyate
jhanam jheyam jiadnagamyam
hydi savvasya dhisthitam
(17) He is the Light of lights, said to be beyond darkness.
Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the goal of know-
ledge—He is seated in the hearts of all.

The Light dwells in the heart of every being. Many of these
passages are quotations from the Upanisads. See Svetasvatara Up.,
Ill, 8 and 16; {Sa Up., 5; Mundaka Up., XIII, 1, 7; Brhad-
aranyaka Up., IV, 4, 16.

The Fruit of Knowledge
18 ite ksetram tatha jhanam
ifieyam co ’ktam samasatah
madbhakia etad vijiaya
madbhavayo ’papadyate308 The Bhagavadgita

(18) Thus the field, also knowledge and the object of know-
ledge have been briefly described. My devotee who under-
stands thus becomes worthy of My state.

When the devotee sees the Eternal Indwelling Divine, he puts
on the divine nature with the characteristics of freedom, love
and equality. ‘He attains unto my state.”

Nature and Spirit
19. prakrtim purusam cat "va
‘ddhy ang@dt ubhav api
vikdvams ca gundms cat ’va
viddhi prakrtisambhavén

   

19) Know thou that prakrti (nature) and purusa (soul) are
both beginningless; and know also that the forms and modes
are born of prakrti (nature).

As the Supreme is eternal, so are His prakrtis.!

_ Through the possession of the two prakrtis, nature and soul,
Igvara causes the origin, preservation and dissolution of the
universe. The purusa described in this section is not the multiple
purusa of the Samkhya but the ksetrajfia who is one in all fields
The Gitd does not look upon prakrti and purusa as two indepen-
dent elements as the Sarhkhya does but looks upon them as the
inferior and the superior forms of one and the same Supreme.

20. karya karana kartrtve
hetuh prakrtir ucyate
purusah sukhaduhkhaném
bhokirtve hetur ucyate

(20) Nature is said to be the cause of effect, instrument and
agent (ness) and the soul is said to be the cause, in regard to
the experience of pleasure and pain.

For Raryakavanakartytve, there is another reading “harya-
havanakariytve.”’ See Franklin Edgerton: Bhagavadgita, Vol. I,
p. 187 note.

« mityesvaratvad tvarasya, tat prakrtyor apt yuktarh nityatuena
bhavitum. S.XIII. The Field and Iis Knower 309

The body and the senses are produced by prakrti and the
experience of pleasure and pain is by the purugsa subject to
certain limitations. The blissful nature of the self is stained by
joy and sorrow on account of its identification with the object:

of nature.

21 purusah prakytistho ht
bhunkie prakrlijan gundn
kdvanam gunasango sya
sadasadyontjanmasu

(2x) The soul in nature enjoys the modes born of nature.
Attachment to the modes is the cause of its births in goo!
and evil wombs

22 uwpadrasta “‘numanta ca
bharta bhokta mahesvarah
paramdtme ’ti ca ’py ukio
dehe’smin purusah pavah

(22) The Supreme Spirit in the body is said to be the Witness,
the Permitter, the Supporter, the Experiencer, the Great
Lord and the Supreme Self.

Here the Supreme Self is different from the psychophysical
individual who becomes the immortal self by transcending the
separatist consciousness, due to entanglement in the activities of
prakrti. In the Gita, no distinction is made between the knower
of the field and the Supreme Lord."

23 Va evam vetts purusam
prakytim ca gunath saha
sarvathaé vartamano 'pi +
na sa bhilyo ’bhijayate

(23) He who thus knows soul (purusa) and nature (prakrti;
together with the modes, though he acts in every way, he
is not born again.

sarvatha vartamano ’p1: though he acts in every way, whatever
state of life he may be in. R.

' hsetrajiesvarayoh bhedanabhyupagamad gitasastre. S,310 The Bhagavadgita
Different Roads to Salvation

24 dhydnena ’tmani pasyantr
Recid dtmanam adtmana
anye simtkhyena yogena
karmayogena ca pare

(24) By meditation some perceive the Self in the self by the
self; others by the path of knowledge and still others by the
path of works.

Sarhkhya here stands for jfiana,

25. anye tv evant ajanantah
Srutva ’nyebhya upasate
te’ pi ca ’titavanty eva
mytyum Srutiparayanah

(25) Yet others, ignorant of this (these paths of yoga)
hearing from others worship; and they too cross beyond
death by their devotion to what they have heard.

Even those who rely on the authority of teacherst and worship
according to their advice, have their hearts opened out to the
grace of the Lord and thus reach life-eternal,

26. yavat samjayate kimctt
sattvam sthavarajangamam
ksetraksetrajfiasanyyoga!
tad viddhi bharatarsabha

(26) Whatever being is born, moving or unmoving, know
thou, O Best of the Bharatas (Arjuna), that it is (sprung)
through the union of the field and the knower of the field

All life is a commerce between self and not-self. According
to S., the union of the two is of the nature of adhyisa, which
consists in confounding the one with the other. When the con-
fusion is cleared, bondage terminates.

' Srutaparayanah, kevalaparopadesapramanah svayam vwekara-
hitah S.XIII. The Field and Its Knower 31

27. samam sarvesu bhiitesu
tisthantam paramesvaram
vinasyatsy avinasyantam
yah pasyati sa pasyati
(27) He who secs the Supreme Lord abiding equally in all
beings, never perishing when they perish, he, verily, sees

He who sees the Universal Spirit in all things, sees and becomes
himself universal.

“Never perishing when they perish.” If all things are in a
continual state of evolutionary development, then there is no
unchanging God. Bergson, for example, makes God wholly
immanent in the world, changing as it changes. An evolving God
who is conceived as a part of the process of development of the
world will cease to exist, when the universe ceases to move. The
second law of Thermodynamics suggests a condition of eventless
stagnation and perfect rest. An evolving or emergent God cannot
be either the creator or the saviour of the world. He is not an
adequate object for the religious emotions. In this verse, the
Gita assures us that God lives and endures even when the universe
ceases to exist

28. saman pasyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam isvaram
na hinasty atmand 'tmanam
tato yati param gatim
(28) For, as he sees the Lord present, equally cverywhere,
he does not injure his true Self by the self and then he attains
to the supreme goal

29 prakrtyai 'va ca karmays
kriyamandani sarvasah
yah pasyati tatha 'tmanam
akartaram sa pasyati
(29) He who sees that all actions are done only by nature
(prakrti) and likewise that the self is not the doer, he verily
sees,
The true self 1s not the doer but only the witness. It is the
spectator, not the actor. S. savs that there is no evidence to show312 The Bhagavadgita

that there is any variety in him who is non-agent, unconditioned
and free from all specialities, as there is no variety in the sky."
Actions affect the mind and understanding and not the self.

30. yada bhitapythagbhavam
chastham anupasyatt
tata eva ca vistararn
brahma sampadyate tada

(30) When he sees that the manifold state of beings is
centred in the One and from just that it spreads out, then he
attains Brahman.

When the variety of nature and its development are traced to
the Eternal One, we assume eternity. “He realizes the all-per-
vading nature of the Self, inasmuch as the cause of all limitation
is absorbed into the unity of the Self.” Anandagiri.

31. andditvuan nirgunatvat
paramatma ’yam avyayah
Sartrastho ’pi kaunteya
na karoti na lipyate

(32) Because this Supreme Self imperishable is without
beginning, without qualities, so, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna),
though It dwells in the body, It neither acts nor is tainted.

32. yatha sarvagatam sauksmyad
akasam no ’palipyate
sarvatré ’vasthito dehe
tatha ’tmé no 'palipyate

(32) As the all-pervading ether is not tainted, by reason of
its subtlety, even so the Self that is present in every body
does not suffer any taint

33. yatha prakasayaty ekah
krisnam lokam imam ravih
ksetram ksetri tathé krtsnam
prakaSayati bharata

« hsetrajfiam akartararn sarvopadhivwarytam. nirgunasy@hartur
nervisesasy akasasveva bhede pramandnupupattih.XIII. The Field and Its Knower 313

(33) As the one sun illumines this whole world, so does the
Lord of the field illumine this entire field, O Bharata
(Arjuna).

The knower of the field dlumines the whole field, the entire
world of becoming.

34. Rsetraksetrajhayor evam
antaram jhanacaksusa
bhiitaprakrtimoksam ca
ye vidur yanti te param

(34) Those who perceive thus by their eye of wisdom the
distinction between the field and the knower of the field,
and the deliverance of beings from nature (prakrti), they attain
to the Supreme.

bhitaprakrti: the material nature of beings.

itt... ksetraksetrajnavibhagayogo nama trayodaso ‘dhyayah

This is the thirteenth chapter entitled The Yoga of the
Distinction between the Field and the Knower of the Field.CHAPTER XIV

The Mystical Father of All Beings

The Highest Knowledge

Sribhagavan uvaca
1, param bhityah pravaksyami
jhananam jiianam uttamam
yaj jdtva munayah sarve
param siddhim ito gatéh

The Blessed Lord said:
.1) I shall again declare that supreme wisdom, of all wisdom
the best, by knowing which all sages have passed from this
world to the highest perfection.

2. idam jhanam upasritya
mama sadharmyam agatéh
sarge ‘pi no ’pajdyante
pralaye na vyathanti ca
(2) Having resorted to this wisdom and become of like nature
to Me, they are not born at the time of creation: nor are
they disturbed at the time of dissolution

Life eternal is not dissolution into the indefinable Absolute
but attainment of a univeisality and freedom of spirit, which is
lifted above the empirical movement. Its status is unaffected by
the cyclic processes of creation and dissolution, being superior
to all manifestations. The saved soul grows into the likeness of
the Divine and assumes an unchangeable being, eternally conscious
of the Supreme ‘Lord who assumes varied cosmic forms. It is
not svariipata or identity but only samanadharmata or smmilarity
of quality He becomes one in nature with what he seeks, attains
sddySyamukti, He realizes the divine in his outer consciousness
and life. Cp. “Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which
is in heaven is perfect.” Matthew v. 48. S's view is different fromXIV. The Mystical Father of All Beings 315

this. He holds that sddharmya means identity of nature and not
equality of attributes.!

3. mama yonir mahad brahma
tusmin garbham dadhamy aham
sambhavah sarvabhiitanam
tato bhavati bharata

(3) Great brahma (prakrti) is My womb: in that I cast the
seed and from it is the birth of all beings, O Bharata (Arjuna).

If we were merely products of nature, we could not attain life
eternal. This verse affirms that all existence is a manifestation
of the Divine. He is the cosmic seed. With reference to this world,
He becomes Hiranyagarbha, the cosmic soul. S. says: “I unite
the ksetra with the ksetrajiia, giving birth to Hiranyagarbha,
hence to all beings.” The Lord is the Father who deposits in the
womb which is not-self, the seed‘ which is essential life, thus
causing the birth of every individual. The world is the play of
the Infinite on the finite. See note on II, 12. The author here
adopts the theory of creation as the development of form from
non-being, chaos or night. The forms of all things which arise out
of the abysmal void are derived from God. They are the seeds
He casts into non-being.

4. sarvayonisu kaunteya
mirtayah sarbhavanti yah
tasim brahma mahad yonir
aham bijapradah pita

(4) Whatever forms are produced in any wombs whatsoever,
O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), great brahma is their womb and
Iam the Father who casts the seed.

Prakrti is the mother and God is the father of all living forms.
As prakrti is also of the nature of God, God is the father and

1 mama pavamesvarasya sddharmyam mat svaripatam na tu
samanadharmatirh sadharmyam hsetrajnesvarayor bhedan abhyupaga-
mad gitasastve. S. mama isvarasya sadharmyarh sarvatmatvam, sarvani-
yantyatvam, ityadidharmasdmyam sadharmyam. Nilakantha.

mamasadharmyam madritpatvam. Sridhara,316 The Bhagavadgita

mother of the universe. He is the seed and the womb of th
universe. This conception is utilized in certain forms of worship
which are developed out of what some modern puritans deride
as obscene phallicism. The Spirit of God fertilizes our lives and
makes them what God wants them to be.

The Supreme is the Seminal Reason of the world. All beings
result from the impregnation of matter through logoi spermatikor
or animating souls. Through them God carries out His work in
the world. These seeds of the Logos are the ideal forms which
mould the gross world of matter into beings. The ideas, the
patterns of things to be, are all in God. Every possibility of mani-
festation has its root in a corresponding possibility in the un
manifest, wherein it subsists as in its eternal cause, of which the
manifestation is an explicit affirmation. God has an eternal vision
of creation in all its details. Whereas in Socrates and Plato, ideas
and matter are conceived as a dualism, where the relation between
the subtle world of ideas and the gross world of matter is difficult
to understand, in the Gita the two are said to belong to the
Divine. God Himself incarnates the seminal ideas in the forms
of the gross world. These seminal ideas which have a divine
origin, which belong to the causal Logos are the explanation of
our love for God. While God is in one sense transcendent to
human nature, there is also in the soul a direct expression of the
Divine. The cosmic process continues until the causal origin, alpha,
and the final consummation, omega, coincide.

Goodness, Passion and Dullness

5. sativarn rajas tama tte
gunah prakrtisarnbhavah
nibadhnanti mahabaho
dehe dehinam avyayam

(5) The three modes (gunas) goodness (sattva), passion
(rajas), and dullness (tamas) born of nature (prakrti) bind
down in the body, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), the imperish-
able dweller in the body.

What leads to the appearance of the immortal soul in the cycleXIV. The Mystical Father of All Beings 317

of birth and death is the power of the gunas or modes. They are
“the primary constituents of nature and are the bases of all
substances. They cannot therefore be said to be qualities inhering
in these substances.” Anandagiri. They are called gunas, because
their emergence is ever dependent on the purusa of the Sarhkhya
or the Ksetrajfia of the Git. The gunas are the three tendencies of
prakrti or the three strands making up the twisted rope of nature.
Sattva reflects the light of consciousness and is irradiated by it,
and so has the quality of radiance (prakasa). Rajas has an out-
ward movement (pravrtti) and tamas is characterized by inertia
(apravrtti) and heedless indifference (pramada).t It is difficult to
have adequate English equivalents for the three words, sattva,
tajas and tamas. Sattva is perfect purity and luminosity while
rajas is impurity which leads to activity and tamas is darkness
and inertia. As the main application of the gunas in the Gita is
ethical, we use goadness for sattva, passion for rajas and dullness
for tamas.

The cosmic trinity reflects the dominance of one of the three
modes, sattva in Visnu, the preserver, rajas in Brahma, the
creator and tamas in Siva, the destroyer. Sattva contributes
to the stability of the universe, rajas to its creative movement
and tamas represents the tendency of things to decay and die.
They are responsible for the maintenance, origin and dissolution
of the world. The application of the gunas to the three aspects
of the Personal Lord shows that the latter belongs to the objective
or the manifested world, God is struggling in humanity to redeem
it and the godlike souls co-operate with Him in this work of
redemption.2

When the soul identifies itself with the modes of nature, it
forgets its own eternity and uses mind, life and body for egoistic
satisfaction. To rise above bondage, we must rise above the modes
of nature, become ¢rigundtita; then we put on the free and
incorruptible nature of spirit. Sattva is sublimated into the light
of consciousness, jyotih, rajas into austerity, tapas and tamas into
tranquillity or rest, Santi.

«rr and 22, 12 and 22, 13.

2 Cp. Isaiah who speaks of the Messiah in these words: “He hath
borne our griefs and carried our sorrows. He was wounded for our
transgressions. The chastisement of our peace was upon Him and
with His stripes we are healed” (lili, 45).318 The Bhagavadgita

6. tatra sattvam nirmalatvat
prakasakam anamayam
sukhasangena badhnati
jitinasangena ca ’nagha

(6) Of these, goodness (sattva) being pure, causes illumina-
tion and health. It binds, O blameless one, by attachment
to happiness and by attachment to knowledge.

Knowledge here means lower intellectual knowledge.

Sattva does not rid us of the ego-sense. It also causes desire
though for noble objects. The self which is free from all attach-
ment is here attached to happiness and knowledge. Unless we
cease to think and will with the ego-sense, we are not liberated.
Jiiana or knowledge relates to buddhi which is a product of
prakrti and is to be distinguished from the pure consciousness
which is the essence of Atman.

7. vajo ragatmakam viddht
trsndsangasamudbhavam
tan nibadhnati kaunteya
karmasangena dehinam

(7) Passion (rajas), know thou, is of the nature of attraction,
springing from craving and attachment. It binds fast, O Son
of Kunti (Arjuna), the embodied one by attachment to
action

Though the self is not the agent, rajas makes him act with the
idea “I am the doer.” Anandagiri.

8, tamas tv ajhanajam wmddhs
mohanam sarvadehinam
pramadalasyanidrabhis
tan nibadhnati bharata

(8) But dullness (tamas), know thou, is born of ignorance
and deludes all embodied beings. It binds, O Bharata
(Arjuna), by (developing the qualities of) negligence. indo-
lence and sleep.XIV The Mystical Father of All Beings 319

Q. sativam sukhe saitjayate
vajah karmant bhavata
ghanam acrtya tu lamah
pramade safyayaty uta

(9) Goodness attaches one to happiness, passion to action,
O Bharata (Arjuna), but dullness, veiling wisdom, attaches
to negligence

10, rajas tamas ca ’bhibhitya
sattvam bhavat bhaévata
vajah sattvam tamas car’va
tamah sattvam vajas tatha

(r0) Goodness prevails, overpowering passion and dullness,
O Bharata (Arjuna). Passion prevails, (overpowering) goodness
and dullness and even so dullness prevails (overpowering)
goodness and passion

The three modes are present in all human beings, though in
different degrees. No one is free from them and in each soul one
or the other predominates. Men are said to be sattvika, rajasa
or tamasa according to the mode which prevails. When the theory
of the “humours” of the body dominated physiology, men were
divided into the sanguine, the bilious, the lymphatic and the
nervous, according to the predominance of one or the other of the
four humours. In the Hindu classification, the psychic charac-
teristics are taken into account. The sattvika nature aims at light
and knowledge: the rajasa nature is restless, full of desires for
things outward. While the activities of a sittvika temperament
are free, calm and selfless, the rajasa nature wishes to be always
active and cannot sit still and its activities are tainted by selfish
desires. The tamasa nature is dull and inert, its mind is dark and
confused and its whole life is one continuous submission to
environment.

11 sarvadvaresu dehe'smun
prakasa upajayate
wanam yada tadé vidyad
vivrddham sativam ity uta320 The Bhagavadgita

(11) When the light of knowledge streams forth in all the
gates of the body, then it may be known that goodness has
increased.

sarvadvaresu dehesmin: all the gates of the body. The light
of knowledge can have a full physical manifestation. The truth
of consciousness is not opposed to expression in matter. The
Divine can be realized on the physical plane. To divinize the
human consciousness, to bring the light into the physical, to
transfigure our whole life is the aim of yoga.

When our minds are illumined and senses quickened, then
sattva predominates.

12. lobhah pravyttir arambhah
karmandm asamah sprha
vajasy elani jayante
vivrddhe bharatarsabha
(12) Greed, activity, the undertaking of actions, unrest and
craving—these spring up, O Best of the Bharatas (Arjuna),
when rajas increases.

The passionate seeking of life and its pleasures arises trom the
dominance of rajas.

13. aprakaso ‘pravrttss ca
pramado moha eva ca
tamasy etani jayante

vivyddhe kurunandana
(23) Unillumination, inactivity, negligence and mere delu-
sion—these arise, O Joy of the Kurus (Arjuna), when dullness
increases

While prak&éa or illumination is the effect of sattva, aprakaéa

or non-illumination is the result of tamas. Error, misunder-
standing, negligence and inaction are the characteristic n.arks
of a tamasa temperament.

14 yada sattve pravyddhe tu
pralayam yal dehabhrt
tado ‘Hamunidam lokan
amalan pratipadyateXIV. The Mystical Father of All Beings 321

(15) When the embodied soul meets with dissolution, when
goodness prevails, then it attains to the pure worlds of those
who know the Highest,

They do not obtain release but birth in brahmaloka. Nistrai-
gunya or the transcendence of the three gunas is the condition
of release.

15 vajasi pralayam gata
karmasangisu jayate
tatha pralinas tamasi
miidhayonisu jayate
(15) Meeting with dissolution when passion prevails, it is
born among those attached to action; and if it is dissolved
when dullness prevails, it is born in the wombs of the
deluded.

16 karmanak sukytasya ‘huh
Sdttvikam nirmalam phalam
rajasas tu phalam duhkham
ajhanam tamasah phalam

(16) The fruit of good action is said to be of the nature of
“goodness” and pure; while the fruit of passion is pain, the
fruit of dullness is ignorance.

17 sattvdt samjayate jianam
rajaso lobha eva ca
pramadamohau tamaso
bhavato ’jianam eva ca

(17) From goodness arises knowledge and from passion
greed, negligence and error arise from dullness, as also
ignorance.

The psychological effects of the three modes are here set forth.

18. tirdhvam gacchanti sattvastha
madhye tisthanti rajasah
jaghanyagunavritistha
adho gacchanti tamasah322 The Bhagavadgita

(18) Those who are established in goodness rise upwards;
the passionate remain in the middle (regions); the dull
steeped in the lower occurrences of the modessink downwards

The soul evolves through these three stages; it rises from
dull inertia and subjection to ignorance, through the struggle
for material enjoyments to the pursuit of knowledge and happi-
ness. But so long as we are attached, even though it may be to
very noble objects, we are limited and there is always a sense
of insecurity since rajas and tamas may overcome the sattva in
us. The highest ideal is to transcend the ethical level and rise
to the spiritual. The good man (sattvika) should become a saint
(trigunatita). Until we reach this stage, we are only in the making;
our evolution is incomplete.

19. nd nyam gunebhyah kartaram
yada drasta ’nupasyati
gunebhyas ca param vetti
madbhavam so ’dhigacchati

(x9) When the seer perceives no agent other than the modes,
and knows also that which is beyond the modes, he attains
to My being.

“Then his identity with Brahma: becomes manifest.”

20. gundn etan atitya trin
deh dehasamudbhavan
janmamrtyujaraduhkhair
vimukto ’mrtam asnute

(20) When the embodied soul rises above these three modes
that spring from the body, it is freed from birth, death, old
age and pain and attains life eternal.

dehasamudbhavan: this implies that the modes are caused by

the body. “Which are the seed out of which the body is

evolved.” S.1 Even sattvika goodness is imperfect since this

goodness has for its condition the struggle with its opposite.

The moment the struggle ceases and the goodness becomes
* dehotpattibijabhitan.XIV. The Mystical Father of All Beings 323

absolute, it ceases to be goodness and goes beyond all ethical
compulsion. By developing the nature of sattva, we rise
beyond it and obtain transcendent wisdom.

The Character of Him Who is Beyond the Three Modes

arjuna uvaca
21. katr lingais trin gunan etan
atito bhavati prabho
kimacérah katham cai 'tams
trin gunan ativartate
Arjuna said
(21) By what marks is he, O Lord, who has risen above the
three modes characterized? What is his way of life? How
does he get beyond the three modes?

What are the marks of the jivanmukta, of him who achieves
perfection in the present life? The characteristics are more or
less the same as those of the sthitaprajfia (II, 55 ff.) of the
bhaktiman, devotee (XII, 13 ff.). From this it is evident that
the marks of perfection are the same, however it may be reached.

Sribhagavan vaca
22. prakdsar ca pravyttinn ca
moham. eva ca pandava

na dvesti sampracrttani

na nivyliant katksati

The Blessed Lord said:
(22) He, O Pandava (Arjuna), who does not abhor illumina-
tion, activity and delusion when they arise nor longs for
them when they cease.

+ Just as we pull out a thorn by a thorn, so renouncing worldly
things we must renounce renunciation, kantakam hantakeneva yona
tyajasi tam tyaja, By meaus of sattva we overcome rajas and tamas
and then get beyond sattva itself.324 The: Bhagavadgita
23. uddsinavad asino
gunair yo na vicdlyate
guna vartanta ity eva

yo ’vatisthati ne ’ngate
(23) He who is seated like one unconcerned, unperturbed
by the modes, who stands apart, without wavering, knowing
that it is only the modes that act.

He sees the mutations of nature but is not entangled in them.
The modes or gunas are lifted up into pure illumination, divine
activity and perfect calm.

24. samaduhkhasukhah svasthah
samalostasmakafcanah
tulyapriyapriyo dhiras

tulyaninddtmasamstutih
(24) He who regards pain and pleasure alike, who dwells in
his own self, who looks upon a clod, a stone, a piece of gold
as of equal worth, who remains the same amidst the pleasant
and the unpleasant things, who is firm of mind, who regards
both blame and praise as one.

25. manapamanayos tulyas
tulyo mitraripaksayoh
sarvarambhaparityagt
gunatitah sa ucyate
(25) He who is the same in honour and dishonour and the

same to friends and foes, and who has given up all initiative
of action, he is said to have risen above the modes.

26. mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhaktiyogena sevate
Sa gundn samatityat ‘tan
brahmabhiyaya kalpate

(26) He who serves Me with unfailing devotion of love, rises
above the three modes, he too is fit for becoming Brahman.

He is fit for liberation.XIV. The Mystical Father of All Beings 325

27. brahmano hi pratistha *ham
amrtasya ’vyayasya ca
SéiSvatasya ca dharmasya

sukhasyai 'kantikasya ca

(27) For I am the abode of Brahman, the Immortal and the
Imperishable, of eternal law and of absolute bliss.

Here the personal Lord is said to be the foundation of the
Absolute Brahman. S$. makes out that the Supreme Lord is
Brahman in the sense that He is the manifestation of Brahman.
Brahman shows His grace to His devotees through Isvarasakti
and He is that power in manifestation and therefore Brahman
Himself. S. gives an alternative explanation, Brahman is the
personal Lord and the verse means “I, the unconditioned and
the unutterable, am the abode of the conditioned Brahman who
is immortal and indestructible.” Nilakantha takes Brahma to
mean Veda. R. interprets it as the emancipated soul and Madhva
as maya. Madhusiidana takes it for the personal Lord. Krsna
identifies Himself with the absolute, unconditioned Brahman.

itt... gunatrayavibhagayogo nima caturdaso 'dhyayah

This is the fourteenth chapter entitled The Yoga of the
Differentiation of the Three Modes.CHAPTER XV

The Tree of Life

The Cosmic Tree

Svibhagavan uvaca

1 firdhvamiilam adhahsakham
asvattharn préhur avyayam
chandamsi yasya parnant
yas tarn veda sa vedavit

The Blessed Lord said:

(1) They speak of the imperishable agvattham (peepal tree)
as having its root above and branches below. Its leaves are
the Vedas and he who knows this is the knower of the Vedas

Cp. Katha Up. “With root ‘above and branches below, this
world tree is eternal.” It is samsaravrksa, the cosmic tree. M.B.
compares the cosmic process to a tree which can be cut off by
the mighty sword of knowledge, jfdnena paramasinad.s As the
tree originates in God, it is said to have its roots “above”; as it
extends into the world, its branches are said to go “downwards.”
The world is a living organism united with the Supreme.

According to ancient belief, the Vedic sacrificial cult is said to
sustain the world and so the hymns are said to be the leaves
which keep the tree with its trunk and branches alive.

¥ V, 1, See also Re. Veda, I, 24, 7.

I am the originator of the world tree. Tautiriya Up., I, 10.

‘The Petelia Orphic tablet suggests that our body comes from the
earth and our soul trom heaven. “I am a child of Earth and of Starry
Heaven; but my race is of Heaven alone.” Cp. Plato: “As regards
the most lordly part of our soul, we must conceive of it in this wise;
we declare that God has given to each of us, as his demon, that
kind of soul which is housed in the top of our body and which raises
us seeing that we are not an earthly but a heavenly plant—up from
earth towards our kindred in heaven.” Timacus, 90-A.

2 Advamedhaparva 47, 12-15.XV. The Tree of Life 327

2. adhas co’rdhvam prasrtas tasya Sakha
gunapravrddha visayapravalah
adhas ca milany anusamtatani
hkarmanubandhini manusyaloke

(2) Its branches extend below and above, nourished by the
modes, with sense objects for its twigs and below in the world
of men stretch forth the roots resulting in actions.

S. makes out that the downward spreading roots are the
secondary ones, vasanas, which the souls carry as results of past
deeds.

3. na ripam asye ’ha tatho 'palabhyate
na nto na ca 'dir na ca sampratistha
asvaitham enam suviriidhamilam
asangasastrena dydhena chittud

(3) Its real form is not thus perceived here, nor its end nor
beginning nor its foundation. Having cut off this firm-rooted
Asvattham (peepal tree) with the strong sword of non-
attachment.

4. latah padam tat parimargitavyam
yasmin gata na nivartanti bhiiyah
tam eva ca 'dyam purusam prapadye
yatah pravrttih prasyta purani

(4) Then, that path must be sought from which those who
have reached it never return, saying ‘‘I seek refuge only in
that Primal Person from whom has come forth this ancient
current of the world” (this cosmic process).

The disciple, detaching himself from the objective, takes refuge
in the primal consciousness from which cosmic energies issue.

5. nirmanamoha jitasangadosa
adhyatmanitya vinivrttakamah
dvandvair vimuktah sukhaduhkhasamjhair
gacchanty amiidhah padam avyayam tat

(5) Those, who are freed from pride and delusion, who have
conquered the evil of attachment, who, all desires stilled,328 The Bhagavadgita

are ever devoted to the Supreme Spirit, who are liberated
from the dualities known as pleasure and pain and are
undeluded, go to that eternal state.

Manifested Life is Only a Part

6. na tad bhasayate stiryo
na Sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama

(6) The sun does not illumine that, nor the moon nor the
fire. That is My supreme abode from which those who reach
it never return.

Cp. Katha Up., V, 15; Mundaka Up., I, 2-10.
This verse refers to the Immutable Brahman which can be
teached by ascetic practices.

The Lord as the Life of the Universe

7. mamai "va ’mso jivaloke
jivabhiitah sanatanah

manahsasthani ’ndriyani
prakytisthani karsati

(7) A fragment (or fraction) of My own self, having become
a living soul, eternal, in the world of life, draws to itself the
senses of which the mind is the sixth, that rest in nature.

mamaivamsah: a fragment (or fraction) of myself. This does
not mean that the Supreme is capable of division or partition
into fragments. The individual is a movement of the Supreme,
a focus of the one great Life. The self is the nucleus which can
enlarge itself and embrace the whole world, with heart and mind,
in an intimate communion. The actual manifestations may be
partial but the reality of the individual soul is the Divine which
the human manifestation does not fully bring out. God’s image
in man is the bridge between heaven and earth. Each individual
has eternal significance in the cosmos. When he rises above his
limitations, he is not dissolved in the Superpersonal Absolute butXV. The Tree of Life 329

lives in the Supreme! and enters into a co-partnership with God
in the cosmic activity.

§. makes out that the self is a part of the Supreme in the same
way as the space in an earthen jar or a house is a part of the
universal space. For R., the soul is an actual fragment (arn$a)
of God. It becomes a substantial individual soul in the world and
suffers bondage by entering the service of the sense objects.

jivabhiitah: having become a living soul. Sarhkarinanda says,
“The eternal portion, having assumed the condition of the knower
of the field, for the purpose of manifesting name and form, becomes
the cognizer.”? The Supreme becomes the jiva in some mode
(prakarantarena). It is not in essence the jiva but assumes that
form. It is jivabhiita and not jivatmaka.

The jivatman is one centre of the multiple Divine and expresses
one aspect of the Divine consciousness. The jiva belongs to the
world of manifestation and is dependent on the One; the Atman
is the one supporting the manifestation. The jiva’s fulfilment
consists in the expression of his characteristic nature. If he adopts
the right attitude to the Divine, his nature becomes purified of
the influences which diminish and distort it and the truth of his
personality comes out with distinctiveness. While the individuals
are in essence one with the Divine, in the world of manifestation,
each is a partial manifestation of the Divine. Each of us is a ray
of the Divine consciousness into which our being, if we will only
allow it, can be transfigured.

prakrtisthani: in their natural places. S. Abiding in bodies made
of prakrti. R.

8. Sarivam yad avapnoti
yac ca’by utkramati 'svarah
erhitvai ‘tani saryati
vayur gandhan ivé ’Sayat
(8) When the lord takes up a body and when he leaves it,
he takes these (the senses and mind) and goes even as the
wind carries perfumes from their places.
The subtle body accompanies the soul in its wanderings through
cosmic existence.

' mwvasisyast mayyeva, XIL, 8.
+ nimaripavyaharanaya ksetrayiialavh gatah pramata bhiitva tisthats.330 The Bhagavadgita

9. Srotram caksuh sparsanam ca
vasanan ghrinam eva ca
adhisthaya manas ca ’yam
visayan upasevate

(9) He enjoys the objects of the senses, using the ear, the eye,
the touch sense, the taste sense and the nose as also the
mind.

10. utkrémantam stiitarn va ‘pr
bhuitjénan va gunanvitam
vimiidha na ‘nupasyanti
pasyanti jndnacaksusah

   

(ro) When He departs or stays or experiences, in contact
with the modes, the deluded do not see (the indwelling soul)
but they who have the eye of wisdom (or whose eye is
wisdom) see.

Il. yatanto yoginas cai nam
pasyanty atmany avasthitam
yatanto py akytatmano
nat nan pasyanty acetasah

(rz) The sages also striving perceive Him as established in
the self, but the unintelligent, whose souls are undisciplined,
though striving, do not find Him.

12. yad adttyagatam tejo
jagad bhasayate ’khilam
‘yac candramasi yac ca ’gnau
tat tejo viddhi mamakam

(12) That splendour of the sun that illumines this whole
world, that which is in the moon, that which is in the fire,
that splendour, know as Mine.

13. gam avisya ca bhiitani
dharayamy aham ojasa
pusnami cau 'sadhth sarvah
somo bhittra rasaimakahXV. The Tree of Life 33m

(x3) And entering the earth, I support all beings by My vital
energy; and becoming the sapful soma (moon), I nourish all
herbs (or plants)
14. ahar vaisvanaro bhiitud
pranindm deham asritah
pranapanasamayuktah

pacamy annarm caturvidham
(14) Becoming the fire of life in the bodies of living creatures
and mingling with the upward and downward breaths, I
digest the four kinds of food.

pacamy: literally cook.

 

15. sarvasya ca ’har hydi samnivisto
mattah smytir jianam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedantakrd vedavid eva ca ’’ham
(x5) And I am lodged in the hearts of all; from Me are
memory and knowledge as well as their loss. I am indeed
He who is to be known by all the Vedas. I indeed (am) the
author of the Vedanta and I too the knower of the Vedas.

apohanam : loss, destruction, rejection.

The Supreme Person

16. dvdv imau purusau loke
ksaras ca 'ksara eva ca
ksarah sarvani bhiitani
kiitastho ’ksara ucyate
(16) There are two persons in this world, the perishable and
the imperishable, the perishable is all these existences and
the unchanging is the imperishable.

17. uttamah purusas tv anyah
paramatme ’ty udahrtah
yo lokatrayam avisya
bibharty avyaya isvarah
* Cp. Bhisma, who in the M.B. says of Krgna, vedavedangarsiita-
nam balan capy adhikarh tathd.332 The Bhagavadgita

(z7) But other than these, the Highest Spirit called the
Supreme Self who, as the Undying Lord, enters the three
worlds and sustains them.

The soul in the ever changing cosmos is ksara; aksara is the
eternal spirit, unchanged and immobile, the immutable in the
mutable When the soul turns to this immutable, the cosmic
movement falls away from it and it reaches its unchanging
eternal existence. These two are not irreconcilable opposites, for
Brahman is both one and many, the eternal unborn as also the
cosmic streaming forth.

For the Gi/@, this moving world is a creation of the Lord. The
Divine accepts the world and acts in it; varta eva ca karmani.
From the cosmic end, the Supreme is [$vara, the Highest Person,
Purusottama, the Lord of the universe who dwells in the heart of
every creature.?

paramatma: the Supreme Self. God in the soul. Gitd refers here,
not to the unknown abyss of the Godhead but to the Spirit,
indwelling and moving creation.

The Gita exalts the conception of the Personal God who com-
bines in Himself the timeless existence (aksara) and the temporal
beginning (ksara).

. interprets the mutable as the changing universe, the immut-
able as the mayaSakti or the power of the Lord and the Supreme
is said to be eternal, pure and intelligent and free from the
limitations of the mutable and the immutable.

R. takes aksara to be the emancipated soul. The universe
consists of two essences distinguished as the self and the inani-
mate (jada), the immutable and the mutable. Above them is the
Supreme transcending the universe and yet at the same time
permeating it. The two purusas may be interpreted as referring
to the two natures, the one higher, His own essential nature,
adhyatma, and the other lower, prakrti. Cp. Suetasvatara Up.,
I, Io.

18. yasmat ksaram atito ’*ham
aksarad api co ’ttamah

ato ’smi loke vede ca
prathitah purusottamah

t Cp. Amarakoéa: eharitpataya tu yah kalavyapi sa kitasthah.

+ auyayah, sarvajiatvena isvaradharmena, alpajfiatvena jivadhar
mena va, na vyeti vardhate kstyate vety arthah. Nilakantha.XV. The Tree of Life 333

(18) As I surpass the perishable and am higher even than
the imperishable, I am celebrated as the Supreme Person
in the world and in the Veda.

Cp. Mundaka Up., II, 1, 1-2. aksavat paratah parah purusah.

19. yo mam evam asanvmiidho
janati purusottamam
sa sarvavid bhajati mam
sarvabhavena bharata
(19) He who, undeluded, thus knows Me, the Highest Person,
is the knower of all and worships Me with all his being (with
his whole spirit), O Bharata (Arjuna).

Knowledge leads to devotion.

20, iti guhyatamarh Sastram
tdam uktan maya nagha
etad buddhvd buddhiman syat
kytakrtyas ca bhévata

(20) Thus has this most secret doctrine been taught by Me,
O blameless one. By knowing this, a man will become wise
and will have fulfilled all his duties, O Bharata (Arjuna).

iti... purusottamayogo nama paficadaso *dhyayah

This is the fifteenth chapter entitled The Yoga of the
Supreme Person.CHAPTER XVI
The Nature of the Godlike and the Demoniac Mind

Those of Divine Nature

Sribhagavan vaca
1. abhayam sattvasansuddhir
jranayogavyavasthitih
dinam damas ca yajfias ca
svadhyayas tapa a@rjavam
The Blessed Lord said:

(z) Fearlessness, purity of mind, wise apportionment of
knowledge and concentration, charity, self-control and
sacrifice, study of the scriptures, austerity and uprightness.

In Indian religious symbolism, the distinction between the
devas, the shining ones and the asuras, the titans, the children
of darkness is an ancient one. In the Rg. Veda we have the struggle
between the gods and their dark opponents. The Ramayana repre-
sents a similar conflict between the representatives of high culture
and those of unbridled egoism. M.B. tells us of the struggle
between the Pandavas, who are devotees of dharma, of law and
justice, and the Kauravas who are lovers of power. Historically,
mankind-remains remarkably true to type, and we have today
as in the period of the M.B. some men who are divinely good,
some who are diabolically fallen and some who are damnably
indifferent. These are the possible developments of men who are
more or less like ourselves. The devas and the asuras are both
born of Prajapati. Chandogya Up., I, 2, 1.

2. ahimsa satyam akrodhas
tyagah Santir apaisunam
daya bhitesv aloluptvarh
mardavam hrir acépalam
(2) Non-violence, truth, freedom from anger, renunciation,
tranquillity, aversion to fault finding, compassion to living
beings, freedom from cavetousness, gentleness, modesty and
steadiness (absence of fickleness).XVI. The Nature of the Godlike and the Demoniac Mind 335

3. tejah ksama dhytih Saucam
adroho na ’timanita
bhavanti sampadarh daivim
abhijatasya bharata
(3) Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, freedom from
malice and excessive pride—these, O Pandava (Arjuna), are
the endowments of him who is born with the divine nature.

The human race is not divided into the kingdom of Ormuzd
and the kingdom of Ahriman. In each man are these two kingdoms
of light and of darkness.

The teacher has set forth the distinctive qualities of those who
are seeking for the divine perfection. Now he states the qualities
of those who aim at power, glory and easy life. The distinction
is neither exclusive nor comprehensive. Many beings partake of
the natures of both. M.B. says: “Nothing is wholly good or
wholly evil.”"*

The Demoniac

4. dambho darpo 'timanas ca
krodhah parusyam eva ca
ajhanam ca ’bhijatasya
Partha sampadam asurim
(4) Ostentation, arrogance, excessive pride, anger, as also
harshness and ignorance, these, O Partha (Arjuna), are the
endowments of him who is born with the demoniac nature.

Their Respective Results

5. daivt sampad vimoksaya
nibandhaya ’surt mata
ma Sucah sarnpadam daivim

abhijato ’si pandava
(5) The divine endowments are said to make for deliverance
and the demoniac for bondage. Grieve not, O Pandava
(Arjuna), thou art born with the divine endowments (for
a divine destiny).

' ndtyantan gunavat hittin natyantarn dosavat tatha.336 The Bhagavadgita

The traditional virtues of a devout Hindu are brought together
as indicating a “godly’’ state of life. The asuras are clever and
energetic but suffer from an exaggerated egoism and have no
moral scruples or spiritual aims.

The Nature of the Demoniac

6. dvau bhiitasargau loke 'smin
daiva asura eva ca
daivo vistarasah prokta
asuram partha me srnu

(6) There are two types of beings created in the world—the
divine and the demoniac. The divine have been described
at length. Hear from me, O Partha (Arjuna), about the
demoniac.

See Brhadaranyaka Up., 1, 3, I.

7. pravritim ca nivrttim ca
jana na vidur asurah
na Saucam na "pi ca ’céro
na satyam tesu vidyate
(7) The demoniac do not know about the way of action or

the way of renunciation. Neither purity, nor good conduct,
nor truth is found in them.

 

 

8. asatyam apratisthar: te
jagad chur anisvaram
aparasparasambhitam
kim anyat kamahaitukam

(8) They say that the world is unreal, without a basis, with-
out a Lord, not brought about in regular causal sequence,
caused by desire, in short

apratistham: without a basis, without a moral basis. This is the
view of the materialists.

aparasparasambhitam: not brought about in regular sequence.
It is interpreted in other ways also. The world presided over byXVI. The Nature of the Godlike and the Demoniac Mind 337

igvara conforms to a settled order, where things proceed from
others according to law and the materialists deny the order in
the world and hold that things arise any how. They believe that
there is no regular succession and that the world is there only for
the sake of enjoyment. .

“This is the view of the Lokayatikas that sexual passion is the
sole cause of all living creatures.”

gy. eta dystim avastabhya
nastatmano ’lpabuddhayah
prabhavanty ugrakarmanah
ksaydya jagato ‘hitah
(9) Holding fast to this view, these lost souls of feeble under-
standing, of cruel deeds, rise up as the enemies of the world
for its destruction.

10. kamam Gsritya duspiirant
dambhamanamadanvitah
mohad grhitva ’sadgrahan
bravartante ’Sucivratah
(to) Giving themselves up to insatiable desire, full ot
hypocrisy, excessive pride and arrogance, holding wrong
views through delusion, they act with impure resolves
Cp. Brhaspati Stra, which declares that kama is the supreme
end of man."

Il. contam aparuneyam ca
pralayantam upasritah
khamopabhogaparama
etavad iti miscitah
(tz) Obsessed with innumerable cares which would end only
with (their) death, looking upon the gratification of desires
as their highest aim, assured that this is all.
This is the materialist doctrine which asks us to eat, drink and
be merry, for death is certain and there is nothing beyond.
+ kama evaikah purusarthah.

* Cp. yavad jivet sukham jivet, rnam kytva ghrtam pibet
bhasmibhitasya dehasya punay dgamanarn kutah.338 The Bhagavadgita

12, asapasasatair baddhah
kamakrodhaparayanah
thante kamabhogartham
anyayend 'rthasamcayan
(12) Bound by hundreds of ties of desire, given over to lust
and anger, they strive to amass hoards of wealth, by unjust
means, for the gratification of their desires.

13. tdam adya maya labdham
imam prapsye manoratham
idam ast ’’dam api me
bhavisyati punar dhanam

(13) ‘‘This today has been gained by me: this desire I shall
attain, this is mine and this wealth also shall be mine (in
future).

14. asau maya hatah satrur

hanisye ca ’parin api

isvaro "ham aham bhogt
siddho *ham balavin sukhi

(14) “‘This foe is slain by me and others also I shall slay.
Tam the lord, I am the enjoyer, I am successful, mighty and
happy.

This is the greatest sin of all, the sin of Lucifer, the claim to
be oneself the god-head.

The temptation to achieve power and exercise sovereignty has
been widespread. The disposition to dominate others has made
man a slave, The divine souls reject the temptation as Jesus did
in the wilderness, But the demoniac souls accept these ends and
exalt pride, self-conceit, cupidity, hatred, brutality as virtues.

15. adhyo ‘bhyanavan asm
ko ’nyo sti sadr$o maya
yaksye dasyami modisya
ity ajhanavimohitah
(5) “‘I am rich and well-born. Who is there like unto me?
I shall sacrifice, I shall give, I shall rejoice,” thus they (say),
deluded by ignorance.XVI. The Nature of the Godlike and the Demoniac Mind 339

16. anekacittavibhranta
mohajélasamaurtah
prasakiah kamabhogesu
patanti narake ‘Sucau

(16) Bewildered by many thoughts, entangled in the meshes
of delusion and addicted to the gratification of desires, they
fall into a foul hell.

17. dtmasambhauitah stabdha
adhanamanamadanvitah
yajanie namayajiais te
dambhend 'vidhipiirvakam

(17) Self-conceited, obstinate, filled with the pride and
arrogance of wealth, they perform sacrifices which are so
only in name with ostentation and without regard to rules.

18. ahartkaram balam darpam
kamam krodham ca samSritah
mam atmaparadehesu
pradvisanto 'bhyasityakah

(18) Given over to self-conceit, force and pride arid also to
lust and anger, these malicious people despise Me dwelling
in the bodies of themselves and others..

“God dwells as witness of their evil life.” S.

1g. ‘an aham dutsatah kriivan

samsdresu naradhamin

ksipamy ajasram asubhan
asurisy eva yonisu

(19) These cruel haters, worst ot men, I hurl constantly these
evil-doers only into the wombs of demons in (this cycle of)
births and deaths

20. asurim yonim apanna
migha janmani-~janmani
mam aprapyat ’va kaunteya
tato yanly adhamam eatin340 The Bhagavadgita

(20) Fallen ‘into the wombs of demons, these deluded beings
from birth to birth, do not attain to Me, O Son of Kunti
(Arjuna), but go down to the lowest state.

We are advised to shake off this demoniac nature. This does
not mean predestination, for it is said that it is always open to
us to turn godward and achieve perfection. It is not impossible
at any stage. The Indwelling Spirit is in each soul and that means
the hope of immortality is always there. Even the greatest sinner,
if he turns to God, can achieve freedom. See IV, 36.

The Triple Gate of Hell

21. trividham narakasye ‘dam
dvaram nasanam atmanah
kamah krodhas tatha lobhas
tasmad etat trayam tyajet
(2x) The gateway of this hell leading to the ruin of the soul

is threefold, lust, anger and greed. Therefore these three, one
should abandon,

22. etair vimuktah kaunteya
tamodvarais tribhir narah
acaraty atmanah Sreyas
tato yati param gatin
(22) The man who is released from these, the three gates to
darkness, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), does what is good for
his soul and then reaches the highest state.

Scripture the Canon for Duty

23. yah sastravidhim uisyjya
vartate kamakavatah
na sa siddhim avaépnoti
na sukhari na param gatim

(23) But he who discards the scriptural law and acts as his
desires prompt him, he does not attain either perfection or
happiness or the highest goalXVI. The Nature of the Godlike and the Demoniac Mind 341

24 lasmac chastram pramanam te
karyakaryavyavasthitau
(ated Sastravidhanoktam

karma kartum tha ’rhasi
(24) Therefore let the scripture be thy authority for deter-
mining what should be done and what should not be done,
Knowing what is declared by the rules of the scripture,
thou shouldst do thy work in this world.

S@stra: scripture.

The drive of desire must be displaced by the knowledge of
right action, but when the supreme end of the freedom of spirit
is attained, the individual acts not from instinct, not from law
but from a deep insight into the spirit of all life. We generally
act according to our personal desire, then regulate the course of
our conduct by reference to prescribed social codes and ultimately
attain a deeper intention of life’s meaning and act according to
its guidance. The prompting of desire (XVIII, 59), the guidance
of law (XVI, 24) and the spontaneity of spirit (XVIII, 64;
XI, 33) are the three stages.

wt... daivdsurasampadvibhagayogo nama sodaso ‘dhyayah

This is the sixteenth chapter entitled The Yoga of the Dis-
tinction between the Divine and the Demoniac Endowments.

' Cp. SAsti yat sddhanopayam purusdrthasya nirmalam,
tatha eva badhanopayam tat sastram iti kathyate.CHAPTER XVII
The Three Modes Applied to Religious Phenomena

Three Kinds of Faith

arjuna uvaca
1. ye Sastravidhim utsrjya
yajante Sraddhaya 'nvitah
tesam nistha tu ka krsna
sattvam aho vajas tamah
Arjuna said:

(x) Those who, neglecting the ordinances of scriptures, offer
sacrifices filled with faith—what is their position, O Krsna?
Is it one of goodness or of passion or of dullness?

These do not wilfully defy the rules of scripture but are ignorant
of them.

S. argues that the nature of one’s faith does not depend upon
conformity to scriptural injunctions but on his character and the
worship he adopts.

R. adopts a Jess liberal view and thinks that those who violate
the Sastras out of ignorance or wilful neglect, whether with faith
or without faith, are to be condemned.

Sribhagavan uvaca
2. inividha bhavati Sraddha
dehinam sa svabhavaja
sattvikt rajasi cai ‘va
tamasi ce ’t (am Ssrnu
The Blessed Lord said:

(2) The faith of the embodied is of three kinds, born of their
nature, good, passionate and dull. Hear now about it.

 

3. Sativdnuriipa sarvasya
Srvaddha bhavati bhérata
Sraddhamayo 'yam puruso
yo yacchraddhah sa eva sahXVII. The Three Modes Applied to Religious Phenomena 343

(3) The faith of every individual, O Bharata (Arjuna), is in
accordance with his nature. Man is of the nature of his faith:
what his faith is, that, verily, he is.

The author here takes up for consideration a number of
questions which probably aroused interest at the time, about
faith, diet, sacrifice, asceticism, almsgiving, renunciation and
relinquishment.

sativa: svabhava, nature.

Sraddha or faith, is not acceptance of a belief. It is striving
after self-realization by concentrating the powers of the mind
on a given ideal.

Faith is the pressure of the Spirit on humanity, the force that
urges humanity towards what is better, not only in the order of
knowledge but in the whole order of spiritual life. Faith, as the
inward sense of truth, points to the object over which fuller light
is shed later.

After all, the ultimate and incontrovertible evidence of any
religious faith is the evidence of the believer’s heart.

A popular verse makes out that the aims which religion offers
prove effective according to one’s faith in them.: Bhagavata
says that the fruit of worship follows the faith of the doer.2 We
are what we are on account of our past and we can create our
future. Cp. Plato: “Such as are the trend of our desires and the
nature of our souls, just such each of us becomes.”3 Cp. Goethe:
“Earnestness alone makes life eternity.”

4. yajante sattvika devan
yaksaraksamsi rajasah
pretin bhittaganams ca nye

yajante tamasa janah
(4) Good men worship the gods, the passionate worship the
demigods and the demons and the others (who are) the dull,
worship the spirits and ghosts.

Men of darkness are they who make a cult of the departed
and of spirits.
1 mantre, tirthe, duvje, deve, daivajite, bhesaje, gurau
yady$t bhavand yasya siddhir bhavati tady§3,

4 Sraddhiniirupam phalahetukatvat. VIL, 17.
8 Laws, 904-C.344 The Bhagavadgita
5. asastravihitam ghoram
tapyante ye tapo janah
dambhahamkarasamyuktah

kamaragabalanvitah
(5) Those men, vain and conceited and impelled by the force
of lust and passion, who perform violent austerities, which
are not ordained by the scriptures,

6. karsayantah Sarivastham
bhiitagramam acetasah
mam cat ‘va ntahSartrastham
tan viddhy dsuraniscayan

(6) Being foolish oppress the group of elements in their body
and Me also dwelling in the body. Know these to be demoniac
in their resolves

The methods of self-torture undertaken by some tor purposes
of display such as wearing hair-shirts, or piercing the body with
sharp spikes, are here condemned. Bodily weakness sometimes
produces hallucinations which are mistaken for spiritual visions,
Self-discipline is not to be confused with bodily torture. Cp.
with this, Gautama the Buddha’s admonition: “The habitual
practice of asceticism or self-mortification, which is painful,
unworthy, and unprofitable, ought not to be followed.” The true
discipline of the body by the practice of cleanliness, etc., is given
in verse 14.

Three Kinds of Food

7. Ghavas tv apt sarvasya
trividho bhavati priyah
yajhas tapas tatha dinam
tesam bhedam imam srnu
(7) Even the food which is dear to all is of three kinds
So are the sacrifices, austerities and gifts. Hear thou the
distinction of these.

Dhammacakkappavatiana Sutta.XVIL. The Three Modes Applied to Religious Phenomena 345

8. dyuhsativabalarogya-
sukhapritivivardhanah
rasyah snigdhah sthira hrdya
ahavah sattvikapriyah
(8) The foods which promote life, vitality, strength, health,
joy and cheerfulness, which are sweet, soft, nourishing and
agreeable are dear to the “good.”

g. katvamlalavanatyusna-
tikgnarithsavidahinah
Ghia rajasasye ’ sta
dubkhasokamayapradah
(9) The foods that are bitter, sour, saltish, very hot, pungent,
harsh and burning, producing pain, grief and disease are
liked by the ‘‘passionate.””

10. yatayamam gatarasam
pili paryusitam ca yat
ucchistam api ca ’medhyam
bhojanam tamasapriyam
(to) That which is spoiled, tasteless, putrid, stale, refuse and
unclean is the food dear to the ‘‘dull.”
As the body is built up of the food taken, the quality ot food
is important.t

Three Kinds of Sacrifice
11. aphalakanksibhir yajfio
vidhidrsto ya ijyate
yastavyam eve ’ti manah
samadhaya sa sattvikah

' Chandogya Up., VU, 26, 2, aharu suddhau sattuasuddhs}, where
sattva means antahkarana.
‘The kind of diet we take has its mfluence on our power o! selt-
control.
Cp. visuimitra-parasara-prabhrlayah vatambuparndsanah
tepi strimukhapanhajarh sulalitarh dystuaiva moham: gatah
Salyannam dadhidugihagoghrtayutarh ye bhuftjate manavah
tesam indriyanigraho yadi bhavet, vindhyas (avet sdgaram,346 The Bhagavadgita

(tr) That sacrifice which is offered, according to the scrip-
tural Jaw, by those who expect no reward and believe firmly
that it is their duty to offer the sacrifice, is “good.”

The yajfia of the Gita is not the same as the ceremonial sacrifice
of the Veda. It is sacrificial action in general by which man
dedicates his wealth and deeds to the service of the One Life in
all. People with such a sacrificial spirit will accept even death
gladly, though unjustly meted out to them, so that the world
may grow through their sacrifice. Savitri tells Yama that good
people maintain the world through their suffering and sacrifice.
santo bhitmimh tapasd dharayanti.

aphalakinksibhih: those who expect no reward. They do the
right but are indifferent to the consequences. A Socrates or a
Gandhi is concerned only whether he is.doing right or wrong,
acting the part of a good man or of a bad, and not whether he
has a chance of living or dying.

12. abhisamdhaya tu phalam
dambhartham api cai ’va yat
tjyate bharatasrestha
tam yajham viddhi rajasam
(12) But that which is offered in expectation of reward or
for the sake of display, know, O best of the Bharatas
(Arjuna), that sacrifice to be ‘‘passionate.””

13. vidhthinam asrstannam
mantrahinam adaksinam
Sraddhavirahitam yajham

tamasam paricaksate
(m3) The sacrifice which is not in conformity with the
law, in which no food is distributed, no hymns are chanted
and no fees are paid, which is empty of faith, they declare
to be ‘‘dull.”

The distribution of food and the payment of fee are symbolic
of help to others without which all work is self-regarding.XVII. The Three Modes Applied to Religious Phenomena 347
Three Kinds of Penance

14. devadvijaguruprajna-
pijanarh saucam arjavam
brahmacaryam ahimsa ca
Stirivam tapa ucyate

(x4) The worship of the gods, of the twice-born, of teachers
and of the wise, purity, uprightness, continence and non-
violence, this is said to be the penance of the body.

15. anudvegakaram vakyarh
satyant priyahitam ca yat
suddhyayabhyasanam cat ’va
vanmayam tapa ucyate t
(15) The utterance (of words) which gives no offence, which
is truthful, pleasant and beneficial and the regular recitation
of the Veda—this is said to be the penance of speech

Cp. “Of what is disagreeable and beneficial the speaker and
the hearer are hard to find.”

16, manahprasadah saumyatvan
maunam atmavinigrahah
bhavasamsuddhir ity etat
tapo manasam ucyate

(x6) Serenity of mind, gentleness, silence, self-control, the
purity of mind—this is called the penance of mind.

17 Sraddhayé paraya tapiam
tapas tat trividham naraih
aphalakanksibhir yuktaih
sativikam pavicaksate

1 apriyasya ca pathyasya vakta srota hi durlabhah. M.B. Santi
parva, 63, 17.
If you your lips would keep from slips
Five things observe with care;
Of what you speak, to whom you speak,
And how, and when, and where.
“Uncensored Recollections.”
(See Thirlby Hall, by W. E. Norris, Vol. I, p. 35.)348 The Bhagavadgita

(17) This threefold penance practised with utmost faith by
men of balanced mind without the expectation of reward,
they call “good.”

18. sathkéramanapiijartham
tapo dambhena cai 'va yat
kriyate tad tha proktam
vajasam calam adhruvam
(18) That penance which is performed in order to gain
respect, honour and reverence and for the sake of show is
said to be ‘‘passionate”’; it is unstable and not lasting.

1g. mitdhagrahena 'tmano yat
pidaya kriyate tabah
parasyo ‘tsadanartham va
tat tamasam udahriam
(t9) That penance which is performed with a foolish
obstinacy by means of self-torture or for causing injury to
others is said to be ‘‘dull.””
Now the three kinds of gifts follow.

Three Kinds of Gifts

20 datavyam tt yad dinam
diyate 'nupakarine
dese kale ca patre ca
tad danam sativikart smrtam
(20) That gift, which is made to one from whom no return
is expected, with the feeling that it is one’s duty to give and
which is given in proper place and time and to a worthy
person, that gift is held to be ‘‘good.””
It will lead to complete self-giving, atmasamarpana.
Gifts to the poor not only help the poor but help the givers.
He who gives receives.

21 yat tu pratyupakarartham
phalam uddisya va punah
diyate ca pariklistam
tad danam rajasani smytamXVII. The Three Modes Applied to Religious Phenomena 349

(21) But that gift which is made with the hope of a return
or with the expectation of future gain or when it hurts to
give, is held to be “passionate.”

22. adesakale yad danam
apatrebhyas ca diyate
asatkrtam avajhatant
tat tamasam udahrtam
(22) And that gift which is made at a wrong place or time
or to an unworthy person, without proper ceremony or with
contempt, that is declared to be ‘“‘dull.””

The Mystical Uiterance: Aum Tat Sat

23. aur tat sad iti nirdeso
brahmanas trividhah smrtah
lvahmanas tena vedas ca
yagnas ca vihitah pura
(23) “Aum Tat Sat’’—this is considered to be the threefold
symbol of Brahman. By this were ordained of old the
Brahmins, the Vedas and the sacrifices

See III, 10.

“Aum” expresses the absolute supremacy, “tat” the universality
and “‘sat’’ the reality of Brahman. The Taittiriya Up. says ‘‘sacca
tyaccabhavat.”* It became sat (which is existent) and tat (that
which is beyond). It is the cosmic universe as well as that which
is beyond it. It stands for the three states of consciousness,
waking (jagrat), dream (svapna) and sleep (susupti) leading up
to the transcendental state (turiya). See Mandakya Up. See also
B.G., VH, 8 and VIII 13.

24. «asmad aum ity udahrtya
ypajnadénatapahkriyah
pravartante vidhanoktah
satatam brahmavadinim
(24) Therefore with the utterance of ‘‘aum” the acts of
sacrifice, gift and penance enjoined in the scriptures are
always undertaken by the expounders of Brahman

I, 6.350 The Bhagavadgita

25. tad ity anabhisamdhaya
phalam yajfiatapahkriyah
danakriyas ca vividhah
kriyante moksakanksibhih
(25) And with the utterance of the word ‘‘tat” the acts of
sacrifice and penance and the various acts of giving are per-
formed by the seekers of salvation, without aiming at the
reward.

26. sadbhave sadhubhave ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
prasaste karmani tatha
sacchabdah partha yujyate

(26) The word ‘‘sat” is employed in the sense of reality and
goodness; and so also, O Partha (Arjuna), the word ‘‘sat”
is used for praiseworthy action

27. yajhe tapast dane ca
sthitth sad tti co ’cyate
karma cai 'va tadarthiyam
sad ity eva ’bhidhiyate

(27) Steadfastness in sacrifice, penance, gift is also called
“sat’’ and so also any action for such purposes is called ‘‘sat.”

28, asraddhayéd hutarh datiam
tapas taptan kyla ca yat
asad ity ucyate partha

na ca tat pretya no tha
(28) Whatever offering or gift is made, whatever penance is
performed, whatever rite is observed, without faith, it is
called ‘‘asat,” O Partha (Arjuna); it is of no account here-
after or here.

wt... Sraddhatrayavibhagayogo nama sapladaso ‘dhyayah

This is the seventeenth chapter entitled The Yoga of the
Threefold Division of FaithCHAPTER XVIII
Conclusion

Renunciation is to be practised not towards Work but to the
Fruits of Work

arjuna uvaca
I. samnyasasya mahabaho
tattvam icchémi veditum
tydgasya ca hystkesa
prthak kesinisidana
Arjuna said:
(x) I desire, O Mighty-armed (Krsna), to know the true
nature of renunciation and of relinquishment, O Hrsikesa
(Krsna), severally, O KeSinistidana (Krsna).

The Gita insists not on renunciation of action but on action
with renunciation of desire. This is true sarhnydsa. In this verse,
sarhnydsa is used for the renunciation of all works and tyaga for
the renunciation of the fruits of all works. Not by karma, not
by progeny or wealth but by tyaga or relinquishment is release
obtained.t

The Gita urges that the liberated soul can remain in service
even after liberation and is opposed to the view which holds
that, as all action springs from ignorance, when wisdom arises,
action ceases. The teacher of the Gita considers the view, that
he who acts is in bondage and he who is free cannot act, to be
incorrect.

Sribhagavan uvaca
2. kimyanam harmanam nyasam
samnyasam kavayo viduh
sarvakarmaphalatyagam
prahus tyagam vicaksanah
The Blessed Lord said:
(2) The wise understand by “‘renunciation” the giving up

* naharmani na prajaya dhanena tyagenaikend amrtatvam anasub.
Taittiriya Aranyaka X. 10, 3.352 The Bhagavadgita

of works prompted by desire: the abandonment of the fruits
of all works, the learned declare, is relinquishment

Inertia or non-action is not the ideal. Action without any selfish
desire or expectation of gain, performed in the spirit that “I am
not the doer, I am surrendering myself to the Universal Self’ is
the ideal set before us. The Gitdé does not teach the complete re-
nunciation of works but the conversion of all works into niskama
karma or desireless action.

., however, contends that tyaga as taught here 1s applicable
only to karmayogins, while for jfianins complete abandonment
of works is imperative. He holds that knowledge is incompatible
with work.

3. tyayyam dosavad ity eke
karma prahur manisinah
yajfiaddnatapahkarma
na tyajyam iti ca pare
(3) ‘Action should be given up as an evil,’ say some learned
men others declare that ‘acts of sacrifice, gift and penance
are not to be given up’

4. niScayam Srnu me tatra

tyage bharatasattama

tydgo hi purusavydghra
trividhah samprakirtitah

(4) Hear now from Me, O Best of the Bharatas (Arjuna), the
truth about relinquishment: relinquishment, O Best of men
(Arjuna), has been explained as threefold

R. divides relinquishment into (x) relnquishment ot fruit,
(2) relinquishment of the idea that the self is the agent and so
of attachment also, and (3) relinquishment of all idea of agency
with the realization that the Lord is the author of all action.

5. yajhadanatapahkarma
na tyajyam karyam eva tat
yajnio danam tapas cai ’va
pavanani manisinamXVIII. Concluscon 353

(5) Acts of sacrifice, gift and penance are not to be relin-
quished but should be performed. For sacrifice, gift and
penance are purifiers of the wise.

Against the view that all action should be abandoned, since
it leads to bondage, the Gita asserts that sacrifice, gift and penance™
should not be abandoned.

6, eany api tu karmani
sangam tyaktvd phalani ca
Rartavyani 'ti me partha
niscitam matam uttamam
(6) But even these works ought to be performed, giving up
attachment and desire for fruits. This, O Partha (Arjuna),
is my decided and final view

The teacher is decidedly for the practice of Karmayoga.
Actions are not to be set aside: only they have to be done without
selfish attachment or expectation of rewards. Salvation is not
a matter of outward action or inaction. It is the possession of
the impersonal outlook and inner renunciation of ego.

S.’s observation that this does not refer to the devotees of
wisdom who renounce all works (jadnanisthah sarvakarma-
sarmyasinah) is not borne out by the text. Cp. Brhadaranyaka Up,
IV, 4, 22. “It is the Brahman whom the Brahmins wish to know
by the study of the Vedas, and also by means of sacrifice, gift,
and austerities performed without attachment.”

7. niyatasya tu sannyasah
karmano no ’ papadyate
mohat tasya parityagas
tamasah parikirtitah
(7) Verily the renunciation of any duty that ought to be
done is not right. The abandonment of it through ignorance
is declared to be of the nature of ‘‘dullness.”

8. duhkham ity eva yat karma
hayaklesabhayat tyajet
sa hyivd rajasan tyagam
nai 'va tyagaphalam labhet
Cp. tayo dharmaskandha yajiias tapo danam iti,354 The Bhagavadgita

(8) He who gives up a duty because it is painful or from fear
of physical suffering, performs only the relinquishment of
the “passionate” kind and does not gain the reward of
relinquishment.

9. karyam ity eva yat karma
niyatam kriyate 'rjuna
sangam tyaktua phalam cai ’va
sa tyagah sativiko matah
(9) But he who performs a prescribed duty as 4 thing that
ought to be done, renouncing all attachment and also the
fruit—his relinquishment is regarded as one of “‘goodness.””
‘What ought to be done is what is in harmony with the cosmic
purpose.

To. na dvesty akusalam karma
kuSale na ’nusajjate
tyagi sattvasamavisto
medhavi chinnasamsayah
(0) The wise man, who renounces, whose doubts are dis-
pelled, whose nature is of goodness, has no aversion to
disagreeable action and no attachment to agreeable action.

11. na hi dehabhyta sakyam
tyaktum karmany asesatah
yas tu karmaphalatyagi
Sa tyagi 'ty abhidhiyate
(rx) It is indeed impossible for any embodied being to
abstain from work altogether. But he who gives up the fruit
of action, he is said to be the relinquisher.

12, anistam istam misram ca
trnwidham karmanah phalam
bhavaty atyaginam pretya
na tu sarnnyasinam kvacit
(t2) Pleasant, unpleasant and mixed—threefold is the fruit
of action accruing after death to those who have not relin-XVIII. Conclusion 355

quished: there is none whatever for those who have
renounced.

§. considers atyagins to be karmayogins and sarhnyasins to be
those who have renounced all work except that which is essential
for the maintenance of the body.

Work is a Function of Nature

13. paticat ’tani mahabaho
kavanani nibodha me
simmkhye kytante proktani
siddhaye sarvakarmanam

(13) O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), learn of Me, these five factors,
for the accomplishment of all actions, as stated in the
Sarhkhya doctrine.
Sarkhya here means the Vedanta. Ss.
kytante is interpreted as the end of the krta age, that is, as
taught in the original Sarhkhya.

14. adhisthanam tatha karta
Ravanam ca prthagvidham
vividhas ca prthakcesta
daivam cai 'va tra paicamam

(14) The seat of action and likewise the agent, the instru-
ments of various sorts, the many kinds of efforts and provi-
dence being the fifth

adhisthéna or the seat refers to the physical body.

harta: agent. He is, according to $., the phenomenal ego,
upadhilaksano avidydkalpito bhokta, the psychophysical self
which mistakes the organism for the true self; for R. it is the
individual self, the jivatman; for Madhva, it is the supreme Lord
Visnu.

The kart& or the agent is one of the five causes of action.
According to the Sarhkhya doctrine, purusa or the self is a mere
witness. Though, strictly speaking, the self is akartr or non-doer,
still its witnessing starts the activities of prakrti and so the self
is included among the determining causes356 The Bhagavadgita

cesta: efforts: functions of the vital energies w.thin the body.

daivam: providence: represents the non-human factor that inter-
feres and disposes of human effort. It is the wise, all-seeing will
that is at work in the world In all human actions, there is an
unaccountable element which is called luck, destiny, fate or the
force accumulated by the acts of one’s past lives. It is called here
daiva.t The task of man is to drop a pebble into the pond of
time and we may not see the ripple touch the distant shore. We
may plant the seed but may not sce the harvest which lies in
hands higher than our own. Daiva or the superpersonal fate is the
general cosmic necessity, the resultant of all that has happened
in the past, which rules unnoticed. It works in the individual for
its own incalculable purposes.

Belief in daiva should not be an excuse for quiescence. Man is
a term of transition. He is conscious of his aim, to rise from his
animal ancestry to the divine ideal. The pressure of nature,
heredity and environment can be overcome by the will of man.

15. Sariravanmanobhir yar
karma prarabhate narah
nyayyam va viparitam va
paticai ’te tasya hetavah
(15) Whatever action a man undertakes by his body, speech
or mind, whether it is right or wrong, these five are its factors.

16. tatrai vam sati kartivam
atmanam kevalam tu yah
pasyaty akytabuddhitvan
na sa pasyati durmatih

(16) Such being the case, the man of perverse mind who, on
account of his untrained understanding, looks upon himself
as the sole agent, he does not see (truly).

The agent is one factor among five and so he misapprehends
the facts when he looks upon the agent as the sole cause.

S. explains “looks on the pure self as the doer.” If he attributes
agency to the pure self, he misapprehends the facts. The ego is
generally taken to be the doer but it is only one of the main

2 Cp. pirvajanmakytam karma tad daivam iti kathyate. Hitepadesa.XVIII. Conclusion 357

determinants of human action, which are all the products of
nature. When the ego is recognized as such, we are freed from
its binding influence and we live in the greater knowledge of the
Universal Self, and in that self-vision all acts are the products
of prakrti.

17. yasya na *haritkyto bhavo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatva ’pi sa imaml lokin
na hanti na nibadhyate
(t7) He who is free from self-sense, whose understanding
is not sullied, though he slay these people, he slays not nor
is he bound (by his actions).

The freed man does his work as the instrument of the Universal
Spirit and for the maintenance of the cosmic order. He performs
even terrific deeds without any selfish aim or desire but because
it is the ordained duty. What matters is not the work but the
spirit in which it is done. ‘Though he slays from the worldly
standpoint, he does not slay in truth.” S$.

This passage does not mean that we can commit crimes with
impunity. He who lives in the large spiritual consciousness will
not feel any need to do any wrong. Evil activities spring from
ignorance and separatist consciousness and from consciousness
of unity with the Supreme Self, only good can result.

Knowledge and Action
18. jidnarm jneyam parijhata
trividhé karmacoduna
Raranam karma karte ’ti

trividhah karmasamgrahah
(18) Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knowing
subject, are the threefold incitement to action: the instru-
ment, the action and the agent are the threefold composite
of action.

See XIII, 20.

* laukikivh dystim asntya ha'vapi... paramarthikinn dystim asritya
na hanti.358 The Bhagavadgita

Karmacodana refers to the mental planning and karma-
sarhgraha to the actual execution of the action and each has
three aspects.

19. jadnam karma ca karta ca

tridhai ’va gunabhedatah
procyate gunasamkhyane

yathavac chrnu tiny api

(9) Knowledge, action and the agent are said, in the science
of modes, to be of three kinds only, according to difference
in the modes. Hear thou duly of these also.

The Sarkhya system is referred to and it is authoritative in
some matters though not in regard to the highest truth.

Three Kinds of Knowledge

20. sarvabhiitesu yenai 'kam
bhavam avyayam tksate
avibhaktam vibhaktesu
taj jiidnam viddhi sattvikam
(20) The knowledge by which the one Imperishable Being
is seen in all existences, undivided in the divided, know that
that knowledge is of ‘‘goodness.””

21. prihaktvena iu yaj jnanam
nanabhavan prthagvidhan
vetti sarvesu bhittesu
taj jndnam viddhi rajasam
(2t) The knowledge which sees multiplicity of beings in the
different creatures, by reason of their separateness, know
that that knowledge is of the nature of ‘‘passion.”

22. yat tu krisnavad ekasmin
harye saktam ahetukam
atattvarthavad alpam ca
tat timasam udahrtamXVIII. Conclusion 359

(22) But that which clings to one single effect as if it were
the whole, without concern for the cause, without grasping
the real, and narrow is declared to be of the nature of

“dullness.”
Three Kinds of Work

23. niyatam sangarahitam
ardgadvesatah krtam
aphalaprepsund karma
yat tat sattvikam ucyate
(23) An action which is obligatory, which is performed with-
out attachment, without love or hate by one undesirous of
fruit, that is said to be of ‘‘goodness.””

24. yat tu kamepsuna karma
sahamkarena va punah
hriyate bahulayasam
tad rajasam udahrtam
(24) But that action which is done in great strain by one
who seeks to gratify his desires or is impelled by self-sense,
is said to be of the nature of “‘passion.””

bahulayasam: with great strain.

The consciousness of suffering, the sense that we are doing
something disagreeable, that we are passing through grim suffer-
ing and toil takes away from the value of the act. To feel con-
sciously that we are doing something great, that we are sacrificing
something vital is a failure of the sacrifice itself. But when the
work is undertaken for the cause, it is a labour of love and sacrifice
itself is not felt as a sacrifice. Doing unpleasant things from a
sense of duty, feeling the unpleasantness all the time is of the
nature of “passion,” but doing it gladly in utter unself-conscious-
ness, with a smile on the lips, as Socrates drank hemlock, is of
the nature of “goodness.” It is the difference between an act of
love and an act of law, an act of grace and an act of obligation.

25. anubandhar ksayam himsam
anapeksya ca paurusam
mohdad arabhyate karma
yat tat tamasam ucyate360 The Bhagavadgita

(25) The action which is undertaken through ignorance,
without regard to consequences or to loss and injury and
without regard to one’s human capacity, that is said to be
of “‘dullness.”’ -

The effects of actions on others must always be considered;
only selfish aims are to be renounced.

Three Kinds of Doer

26. muktasatigo 'naharwadi
dhytyutschasamanvitah
siddhyasiddhyor nirvikavah
karta sattvika ucyate

(26) The doer who is free from attachment, who has no
speech of egotism, full of resolution and zea] and who is
unmoved by success or failure—he is said to be of the nature
of “goodness ””

27. ragi karmaphalaprepsur
lubdho himsatmako ’Sucih
harsasokanvitah karta
vajasah parikiv-itah

(a7) The doer who is swayed by passion, who eagerly seeks
the fruit of his works, who is greedy, of harmful nature,
impure, who is moved by joy and sorrow—he is said to be
of “‘passionate” nature

28. ayuktah prakrtah stabdhah
Satho naikytiko ’lasah
visadt dirghasitri ca
karta tamasa ucyate
(28) The doer who is unbalanced, vulgar, obstinate, deceit-
ful, malicious, indolent, despondent and procrastinating, he
is said to be of the nature of ‘‘dullness.”

prakrtah: “quite uncultured in intellect and like a child.” §,XVIII. Conclusion 36
Three Kinds of Understanding

29. buddher bhedam dhytes cai ’va
gunatas trividhar srnu
procyamanam asesena
prthaktvena dhanamyjaya

(29) Hear now the threefold distinction of understanding
as also of steadiness, O winner of wealth (Arjuna), according
to the modes, to be set forth fully and separately.

30. prauyttin ca nivrttim ca
karyakarye bhayabhaye
tandham moksam ca ya vetti
buddhih sa partha sattvikt

(30) The understanding which knows action and non-action,
what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, what
is to be feared and what is not to be feared, what binds and
what frees the soul (that understanding), O Partha (Arjuna),
is of the nature of ‘‘goodness.””

31. yaya dharmam adharmam ca
karyam ca ’karyam eva ca
ayathavat prajanati
buddhih sa partha rajast

(31) That by which one knows in a mistaken way the right
and the wrong, what ought to be done and what ought not
to be done—that understanding, O Partha (Arjuna), is of
the nature of “passion ”

32. adharmam dharmam iti ya
manyate tamasa ‘vrta
sarvarthan viparitams ca

buddhih sa partha tamasi
(32) That which, enveloped in darkness, conceives as right
what is wrong and sees all things in a perverted way (con-
trary to the truth), that understanding, O Partha (Arjuna),
is of the nature of ‘dullness ””362 The Bhagavadgita
Three Kinds of Steadiness

33. dhrtya yaya dharayate
manahprinendriyakriyah
yogena ‘vyabhicarinya
dhytih sa partha sattvikt

(33) The unwavering steadiness by which, through concen-
tration, one controls the activities of the mind, the life
breaths and the senses, that, O Partha (Arjuna), is of the
nature of ‘‘goodness.””

dhytth: steadiness of attention which makes us aware of much
that our ordinary vision is not able to observe. Its power is pro-
portional to our detachment from regrets over the past and
anxieties for the future.

34. yaya tu dharmakamarthan
ahrtya dharayate ’rjuna
prasangena phalakankst
ahrtih sa partha rajast

(34) The steadiness by which one holds fast to duty, pleasure
and wealth desiring the fruit in consequence thereof—that,
O Partha (Arjuna), is of the nature of ‘‘passion.””

35. yaya svapnam bhayam sokam
visadam madam eva ca
na vimuficati durmedha
dhytih sa partha tamast

(35) That steadiness by which a fool does not give up sleep,
fear, grief, depression and arrogance, that, O Partha (Arjuna),
is of the nature of dullness.

Three Kinds of Happiness

36. sukham.tv idénim trividham
Srnu me bharatarsabha
abhyasad ramate yatra
duhkhantam ca nigacchattXVIII. Conclusion 363

(36) And now hear from Me, O Best of the Bharatas (Arjuna),
the three kinds of happiness. That in which a man comes to
rejoice by long practice and in which he reaches the end of
his sorrow.

37. jat tad agre visam iva
pariname 'mytopamam
tat sukham sattvikam proktam
dimabuddhiprasddajam

(37) That happiness which is like poison at first and like
nectar at the end, which springs from a clear understanding
of the Self is said to be of the nature of ‘‘goodness.””

38. visayendriyasamyogad
yat iad agre ’inytopamam
parindme visam iva
tat sukham rajasamn smytam

(38) That happiness which arises from the contact of the
senses and their objects and which is like nectar at first but
like poison at the end—such happiness is recorded to be
“passionate.”

39. yad agre ca 'nubandhe ca
sukhart mohanam atmanah

nidralasyapramadottham

tat timasam udahrtam

(39) That happiness which deludes the soul both at the
beginning and at the end and which arises from sleep, sloth
and negligence—that is declared to be of the nature of
“dullness.”

Happiness is the universal aim of life. Only it is of different
kinds according to the modes which dominate our nature. If the
tamas predominates in us, we are satisfied with violence and
inertia, blindness and error. If rajas prevails, wealth and power,
pride and glory give us happiness. True happiness of human
beings lies not in the possession of outward things but in the
fulfilment of the higher mind and spirit, in the development of
what is most inward in us. It may mean pain and restraint but364 The Bhagavadgita

it will lead us to joy and freedom. We can pass from the
happiness of knowledge and virtue to the eternal calm and joy,
Ananda of the spirit, when we become one with the Highest Self
and one with all beings.

Various Duties determined by One’s Nature (Svabhava) and
Station (Svadharma)

40. na tad asti prihivyém va
divi devesu va punah
sativam prakrtijair muktam
yad ebhih syat tribhir gunath

(40) There is no creature either on earth or again among
the gods in heaven, which is free from the three modes born
of nature.

41. brahmanaksatriyavisam
Sidranam ca paramtapa
karmani pravibhaktamt
svabhavaprabhavair gunaih

(41) Of Brahmins, of Ksatriyas,and Vaigyas as also of Siidras,
O Conqueror of the foe (Arjuna), the activities are distin-
guished, in accordance with the qualities born of their nature.

The fourfold order is not peculiar to Hindu society. It is of
universal application. The classification depends on types of
human nature. Each of the four classes has certain well-defined
characteristics though they are not to be regarded as exclusive.
These are not determined always by heredity.

The Gita cannot be used to support the existing social order
with its rigidity and confusion. It takes up the theory of the four
orders and enlarges its scope and meaning. Man’s outward life
must express his inward being; the surface must reflect the
profundity. Each individual has his inborn nature, svabhava, and
to make it effective in his life is his duty, svadharma. Each
individual is a focus of the Supreme, a fragment of the Divine.
His destiny is to bring out in his life this divine possibility. The
one Spirit of the universe has produced the multiplicity of souls in
the world, but the idea of the Divine is our essential nature, theXVIII. Conclusion 365

truth of our being, our svabhava, and not the apparatus of the
gunas, which is only the medium for expression. If each individual
does what is. appropriate to him, if he follows the law of his
being, his svadharma, then God would express Himself in the
free volitions of human beings. All that is essential for the world
will be done without a conflict. But men rarely do what they
ought to do. When they undertake to determine events believing
that they know the plan of the whole, they work mischief on
earth. So long as our work is done in accordance with our nature,
we are righteous, and if we dedicate it to God, our work becomes
ameans of spiritual perfection. When the divine in the individual
is completely manifested, he attains the eternal imperishable
status, $aSvatam padam avyayam.: The problem that human
life sets to us is to discover our true self and live according to
its truth ; otherwise we would sin against our nature. The emphasis
on svabhava indicates that human beings are to be treated as
individuals and not as types. Arjuna is told that he who
fights gallantly as a warrior becomes mature for the peace of
wisdom.

There are four broad types of nature and answering to them
are four kinds of social living. The four classes are not determined
by birth or colour but by psychological characteristics which fit
us for definite functions in society.

42. Samo damas tapah Saucam
ksantir dyjavam eva ca
jhanam vijidnam astikyam
brahmakarma svabhavajam
(42) Serenity, self-control, austerity, purity, forbearance and
uprightness, wisdom, knowledge and faith in religion, these
are the duties of the Brahmin, born of his nature.

Those who belong to the order of Brahminhood are expected
to possess mental and moral qualities. Cp. Dhammapada, 393:
“Not by matted hair, nor by lineage, nor by birth is one a
Brahmin. He is a Brahmin in whom there are truth and righteous-
ness.” Power corrupts and blinds insight. Uncontrolled power
is fatal to mental poise. So the Brahmins eschew direct power

® XVIII, 56.366 The Bhagavadgita

and exercise a general control through persuasion and love and
save the wielders of power from going astray.

43. Sauryam tejo dhrtir daksyam
yuddhe ca’ py apalayanam
danam isvarabhavas ca
ksatram karma svabhavajam

(43) Heroism, vigour, steadiness, resourcefulness, not fleeing
even in a battle, generosity and leadership, these are the
duties of a Ksatriya born of his nature.

Though the Ksatriyas cannot claim to be spiritual leaders, they
have the qualities which enable them to adapt spiritual truths
to the requirements of action.

44. krsigauraksyavanijyam
vaisyakarma svabhavajam
paricaryatmakam karma
Siidrasya pi svabhavajam

 

(44) Agriculture, tending cattle and trade are the duties of
a Vaisya born of his nature; work of the character of service
is the duty of a Sidra born of his nature.

It is not a question of identical opportunities for all men to
rise to the highest station in social life, for men differ in their
powers, but a question of giving equal opportunities for all so
that they may bring their respective gifts to fruition. Each one
should have the opportunity of achieving his human fullness, the
fruits of wisdom and virtue, according to his effort and con-
dition. It makes little difference whether we dig the earth or ao
business or govern a state or meditate in a cell. The vara rules
recognize that different men contribute to the general good in
different ways, by supplying directly urgent wants of which all
are conscious and by being in their lives and work witnesses to
truth and beauty. Society is a functional organization and all
functions which are essential for the health of society are to be
regarded as socially equal. Individuals of varying capacities are
bound together in a living organic social system. Democracy is
not an attempt at uniformity which is impossible but at an
integrated variety All men are not equal in their capacities butXVIII. Conclusion 367

all men are equally necessary for society, and their contributions
from their different stations are of equal value.t

45. sve-sve karmany abhiratah
samsiddhim labhate narah
svakarmaniratah siddhim
yathaé vindati tac chrnu

(45) Devoted each to his own duty man attains perfection.
How one, devoted to one’s own duty, attains perfection,
that do thou hear.

svesve karmany abhiratah: devoted each to his own duty. Each
of us should be loyal at our level to our feelings and impulses; it
is dangerous to attempt work beyond the level of our nature,
our svabhava. Within the power of our nature, we must live up
fully to our duty.

46. yatah pravrttir bhitanam
yena sarvam idan tatam
svakarmana tam abhyarcya
siddhim vindati manavah

«Mr, Gerald Heard in his book on Man the Master (1942) em-
phasizes the need for a “quadritype organization of society.” He
writes: “It would seem then, that there have always becn present
in human community four types or strata of consciousness, We have
already spoken of the first level. These are the eyes or antennae,
the emergent seers and sensitives. .. . Below the eyes are the hands:
behind the forebrain are the motor centres. The two mental
classes below the seers, the upper and lower middle classes, the
politician and the technician—it is to them that is mainly due our
present crisis, The one by its great advances in administration, in
social instruments, has made it possible for the monster states to
exist—and so for their unresolved internal stresses to become more
acute. The other, by its even greater technical advances in plant,
in power machinery, in material instruments has made our societies
hypertrophies—organisms of unbalanced internal structure and
mutually deadly. Besides the two middle classes already made
unstable and disruptive by their becoming individualized, there
remained the basic, unspecialized, unquestioning class or mass—the
coherers, This class is not only capable of faith: it will not hold
together, it will not live without it” (pp. 133-7). Mr. Heard reminds
us that “the Aryan-Sanskrit sociological thought, which first
defined and named this fourfold structure of society, is as much ours
as India’s” (p. 145).368 The Bhagavadgita

(46) He from whom all beings arise and by whom all this is
pervaded—by worshipping Him through the performance
of his own duty does man attain perfection.

Work is worship of the Supreme, man’s homage to God.

The Gita holds that quality and capacity are the basis of
functional divisions. Accepting the theory of rebirth, it holds
that a man’s inborn nature is determined by his own past lives.
All forms of perfection do not lie in the same direction. Each
one aims at something beyond himself, at self-transcendence,
whether he strives after personal perfection, or lives for art or
works for one’s fellows. See also XVIII, 48 and 60.

47. Sreyan svadharmo vigunah
paradharmat svanusthitat
svabhavaniyatam karma
Rurvan na ’pnoti kilbisam

(47) Better is one’s own law though imperfectly carried out
than the law of another carried out perfectly. One does not
incur sin when one does the duty ordained by one’s own
nature.

See III, 35. It is no use employing our minds in tasks which
are alien to our nature. In each of us lies a principle of becoming,
an idea of divine self-expression. It is our real nature, svabhava,
finding partial expression in our various activities. By following
its guidance in our thought, aspiration and endeavour, we pro-
gressively realize the intention of the Spirit for us. What we call
democracy is a way of life which requires us to respect the rights
of every human being to be a person, a unique entity. We should
never despise any man, for he can do something which others
cannot.

48. sahajam karma kaunteya
sadosam api na tyajet
sarvarambha hi dosena
dhiimena 'gnir iva 'urtah
(48) One should not give up the work suited to one’s nature,

O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), though it may be defective, for all
enterprises are clouded by defects as fire by smoke.XVIII. Conclusion 369
Karma Yoga and Absolute Perfection

49. asaktabuddhih sarvatra
jitatma vigatasprhah
naiskarmyasiddhim paramane
sannyasena ’dhigacchati

(49) He whose understanding is unattached everywhere,
who has subdued his self and from whom desire has fled—.
he comes through renunciation to the supreme state trans-
cending all work.

The Gita repeats that restraint and freedom from desire are
essential to spiritual perfection. Attachment to objects, a sense
of ego, are the characteristics of our lower nature. If we are to rise
to a knowledge of our true self, self-possessed and self-luminous,
we must conquer our lower nature with its ignorance and inertia,
its love of worldly possessions, etc.

naiskarmya: the state transcending all work. It is not a com-
plete withdrawal from all work. Such a quietism is not possible
so long as we live in the body. The Gita insists on inner renun-
ciation. As the ego and nature are akin, the liberated soul be-
coming Brahman, the Pure Self described as silent, calm, inactive,
acts in the world of prakrti, knowing what the latter is.

The highest state is here described, not positively as entering
into the Lord but negatively as freedom from kama.

Perfection and Brahman

50. siddhim prapto yatha brahma
tatha "pnoti nibodha me
samasenai ’va kaunteya
nisthé jnanasya ya para
(50) Hear from me, in brief, O Son of Kunti (Arjuna), how,
having attained perfection, he attains to the Brahman,
that supreme consummation of wisdom.

S. writes: “Though thus quite self-evident, easily knowable,
quite near and forming the very self, Brahman appears—to the
unenlightened, to those whose understanding is carried away by

AA370 The Bhagavadgita

the differentiated phenomena of names and forms created by
ignorance, as unknown, difficult to know, very remote, as though
he were a separate thing.”* As there is no need of evidence for
knowing one’s own body, even so there is no need of evidence for
knowing the self which is nearer than the body. When we turn
away from the outward and train our understanding, it is imme-
diately comprehended. See IX, 2.

51. buddhya visuddhaya yukto
dhytyd 'tmanam niyamya ca

Sabdadin visayams tyakiva

ragadvesau vyudasya ca

(51) Endowed with a pure understanding, firmly restraining
oneself, turning away from sound and ovher objects of sense
and casting aside attraction and aversion.

52. viviktasevi laghvast
yaiavakkayamanasah
dhydnayogaparo nityam
vatragyam samupasritah
(52) Dwelling in solitude, eating but little, controlling speech,
body and mind, and ever engaged in meditation and con-
centration and taking refuge in dispassion.

Dhyanayoga is taken as a dvandva compound meaning “medi-
tation on the nature of the self and mental concentration
thereon.” S.

53. ahamkavam balam darpam
kamam krodham parigraham
vimucya nirmamah Santo
brahmabhiiyaya kalpate

(53) And casting aside self-sense, force, arrogance, desire,
anger, possession, egoless and tranquil in mind, he becomes
worthy of becoming one with Brahman.

+ avidyakalpitanamarupavisesakarapahytabuddhindm,  atyantapra
siddham, suvijieyam, dsannataram, dimabhitam apy, aprasiddhar,
durvijneyam, atidivam, anyad iva ca pratibhaty avivekinam.”XVIII. Conclusion 371

Attar quotes a saying of Ibrahim Adham: “Three veils must
be removed from before the pilgrim’s heart ere the door of
Happiness is opened to him. First, thai, should the dominion of
both worlds be offered to him as an eternal gift, he should not
rejoice, since whosoever rejoiceth on account of any created
thing is still covetous, and the covetous man is debarred from the
knowledge of God. The second veil is this, that, should he possess
the dominion of both worlds, and should it be taken from him,
he should not sorrow for his impoverishment, for this is the sign
of wrath and he who is in wrath is tormented. The third is that
he should not be beguiled by any praise or favour, for whosoever
is so beguiled is of mean spirit, and such a one is veiled (from the
Truth): the pilgrim must be high-minded.” Browne: A Literary
History of Persia, Vol. I (1902), p. 425+

The Highest Devotion

54. brahmabhiitah prasannatma *
na Socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
madbhaktin labhate param

(54) Having become one with Brahman, and being tranquil
in spirit, he neither grieves nor desires. Regarding all beings
as alike he attains supreme devotion to Me.

This verse is another indication that, for the Git@, disappearance
of the individual in a featureless Absolute is not the highest state
but devotion to the Supreme Lord who combines in Himself the
immobile and the mobile.

55. bhakiya mam abhijanats
yavan yas ca smi tattvatah
tato mam tativato jiated
viSate tadanantaram
(55) Through devotion he comes to know Me, what My
measure is and who I am in truth; then, having known Me
in truth, he forthwith enters into Me.
The knower, the devotee, becomes one with the Supreme Lord,
the Perfect Person, in self-knowledge and self-experience, Jfidna,372 The Bhagavadgita

supreme wisdom and bhakti, supreme devotion have the same
goal. To become Brahman is to love God, to know Him fully
and to enter into His being.

Application of the Teaching to Arjuna’s Case

56. sarvakarmany api sada
kurvano madvyapasrayah
matprasadad avapnoti

SaSvatamn padam avyayam
(56) Doing continually all actions whatsoever, taking refuge
in Me, he reaches by My grace the eternal, undying abode.

It is also the goal of karmaméarga. In these three verses, the

author indicates that wisdom, devotion and work go together.
Only the work is done with the knowledge that nature or prakrti
is the power of the Divine and the individual is only an instrument
of God. With his heart fixed on the Eternal and through His
grace, whatever he does, he dwells eternally within the Great
Abode.

57. ceétasa sarvakarmani
mayi sannyasya matparah
buddhiyogam upasritya

maccitiah satatam bhava
(57) Surrendering in thought all actions to Me, regarding
Me as the Supreme and resorting to steadfastness in under-
standing, do thou fix thy thought constantly on Me.

“Be always one with Me in heart, will and consciousness.” A

perfect self-giving to the Universal Lord makes Him the spirit
of our life.

58. maccittah sarvadurgént
matprasadat tarisyast
atha cet tvam ahamkaran
na Srosyasi vinanksyast
(58) Fixing thy thought on Me, thou shalt, by My grace,
cross over all difficulties; but if, from self-conceit, thou wilt
not listen (to Me), thou shalt perish.XVIII. Conclusion 373

Man is free to choose salvation or perdition. If we fondly
believe that we can resist the will of the Almighty, we will come
to grief. Defiance of God is due to self-sense (aharhkara) and it
is powerless ultimately. :

59. yad ahamkaram asritya
na yotsya itt manyase
mithyat ’sa vyavasayas te
prakrtis tuam niyoksyati

(59) If indulging in self-conceit, thou thinkest ‘‘I will not
fight,” vain is this, thy resolve. Nature will compel thee.

The desire ‘not to fight” will only be the expression of his
surface nature: his deeper being will lead him to fight. If he casts
down his arms for fear of suffering and holds back from the fight,
and if the war proceeds without him, and he realizes that the
consequences of his abstention would be disastrous to humanity,
he will be impelled to take up arms by the remorseless pressure
of the Cosmic Spirit. He should try therefore to further and co-
operate with the cosmic evolution instead of denying and oppos-
ing it. If he does so, he will change from an essentially determined
to a determining factér. It is Arjuna’s lower nature that will
cause the confusion and the fall from the greater truth of his
being. Now Arjuna has seen the truth and he can act, not for
selfish ends, but as a conscious instrument of the Divine. The
disciple must put aside all selfish fear and obey his Inner Light
which will carry him past all dangers and obstacles.

God lays down the conditions and it is for us to accept them.
We should not waste our strength in fighting against the stream.
Most of us are natural men, eager, impulsive and definite about
our own little schemes, but we must change. The way in which
we can be most useful is by submission to Gud’s choice. St. Francis
de Sales’ favourite prayer sums up this spirit of total subordina-
tion: “Yes, Father! yes, and always Yes!”

60. suabhdvajena kaunteya
nibaddhah svena karmana
kartum nz ’cchasi yan mohat
Kavisyasy avaso 'pi tat374 The Bhagavadgita

(60) That which, through delusion, thou wishest not to do,
O son of Kunti (Arjuna), that thou shalt do even against
thy will, fettered by thy own acts born of thy nature.

You will be driven to do it by the compulsive power of your
nature.

6x. tvarah sarvabhitanam
hyddese 'rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarvabhiitani
yantrariudhani mayaya
(6x) The Lord abides in the hearts of all beings, O Arjuna,
causing them to turn round by His power as if they were
mounted on a machine.

The relations of our unborn nature and its fateful compulsion
are regulated by the Divine who dwells in our hearts and guides
and constrains our development. The power that determines
events is not, as in Hardy, a blind, unfeeling, unthinking will to
which we give the name of “Fate,” “Destiny,” or “Chance.”
The Spirit that rules the cosmos, the Lord who presides over
the evolution of the cosmic plan, is seated also in the heart of
every being and will not let him rest. “Without Thee we cannot
live for a moment. As the truth Thou dost exist eternally within
and without.”2

The Supreme is the inmost self of our existence. Alll life is a
movement of the rhythm of His life and our powers and acts
are all derived from Him. If, in our ignorance, we forget this
deepest truth, the truth does not alter. If we live consciously
in His truth, we will resign all actions to God and escape from
our ego. If we do not, even then the truth will prevail. Sooner
or later we will yield to the purpose of God but in the meanwhile
there is no compulsion. The Supreme desires our free co-operation
when beauty and goodness are born without travail and effort-
lessly. When we become transparent media for the light of God,
He uses us for His work.

1 Like a knitter drowsed,
‘Whose fingers play in skilled unmindfulness
The will has woven with an absent heed
Since life first was, and ever will so weave.

* tum vihdya na Saknomi jiviturh ksanam eva hi
antar bahis' ca nityana tuam satyaricpena vartase.XVIII. Conclusion 375

62. tam eva Saranan gaccha
sarcabhavena bharata
latprasadat param Santini
sthanam prapsyasi Sasvatam
(62) Flee unto Him for shelter with all thy being, O Bharata
(Arjuna). By His grace shalt thou obtain supreme peace and
eternal abode.

sarvabhavena: with all thy being. We must grow conscious of
the Divine on all the planes of our being. The love of Radha for
Krsna is the symbol of integral love in all planes of being from
the spiritual to the physical.

Arjuna is called upon to co-operate with God and do his duty
He must change the whole orientation of his being. He must
put himself at the service of the Supreme. His illusion will then
be dispelled, the bond of cause and consequence will be broken
and he will attain shadowless light, perfect harmony and supreme
blessedness.

63. tit le jidnam akhyatan
guhyad guhyataram maya
vimrsyai ’tad asesena
yathe ’cchasi tatha kuru
(63) Thus has wisdom more secret than all secrets, been
declared to thee by Me. Having reflected on it fully do as
thou choosest.

vimrSyaitad aSesena: reflect on it fully. We must use our intel-
ligence,? exercise our discrimination.

yathé icchasi tatha kuru: do as thou choosest. God is seemingly
indifferent, for He leaves the decision to Arjuna’s choice. His
apparent indifference is due to His anxiety that each one of us
should get to Him of his own free choice. He constrains no one
since free spontaneity is valuable. Man is to be wooed and not
coerced into co-operation. He is to be drawn, not driven, per-
suaded, not compelled. The Supreme does not impose His com-
mand. We are free at any moment to reject or aecept the Divine
call. The integral surrender should be made with the fullest con-

1 Cp. M.B., XII, r4r, 102.

tasmat kaunteya vidusd dharmadharmaviniscaye
buddhim asthava lokesmin vartitavyam kitatmand.376 The Bhagavadgita

sent of the seeker. God does not do the climbing for us, though
He is ever ready to help us when we stumble, comfort us when
we fall. God is prepared to wait in patience till we turn to Him.

The conflict between the doctrine of human freedom and that
of predestination has roused much discussion in Europe and
India. Thomas Aquinas holds that freedom of the will and human.
effort play a chief part in man’s salvation, though the will itself
may need the support of God’s grace. “Whence, the predestined
must strive after good works and prayer; because through these
means predestination is most certainly fulfilled . . . and therefore
predestination can be furthered by creatures, but it cannot be
impeded by them.”: Man has the freedom to refuse the grace
offered to him by God. Bonaventura thinks that it is God’s
intention to offer grace to man but only those who prepare them-
selves for its reception by their conduct, receive it. For Duns
Scotus, since freedom of the will is God’s command, even God
has no direct influence on man’s decision. Man can co-operate
with God’s grace but he can also refrain from it.

Spiritual leaders act on us not by physical violence, miracle-
mongering or spell-binding. A true teacher does not assume a
false responsibility. Even if the pupil takes a wrong turn, he
would only counsel but not compel him to turn back, if such a
procedure should interfere with his individual freedom of choice.
Even error is a condition of growth. The teacher encourages the
pupil’s early steps even as the father does the tottering steps
of the child. He stretches out a hand to help, when he trips but
he leaves it to the disciple to choose his path and control his steps.

Krsna is only the charioteer; he will obey Arjuna’s direction.
He bears no arms. If he influences Arjuna, it is through his all-
conquering love which is inexhaustible. Arjuna should think for
himself and discover for himself. He should not act from simple
and blind beliefs acquired from habit or authority. Inarticulated
assumptions adopted inevitably and emotionally have led to
fanatic bigotries and caused untold human misery. It is there-
fore important that the mind should seek rational and
experiential justification for its beliefs. Arjuna must have a sense
of real integrity, that his ideas are his own and not those imposed
on him by his teacher. Teaching is not ndoctrination.

2 Summa Theologica E.T. by the Fathers of the English Dominican.
Province. Second Edition (1929), Part IQ. 23, Art. 8.XVIII. Conclusion 377

Final Appeal

64. sarvaguhyatamam bhiiyah
Synu me paramam vacah
isto ’’si me drdham itt
tato vaksyami te hntam

(64) Listen again to My supreme word, the most secret of
all. Well beloved art thou of Me, therefore I shall tell thee
what is good for thee.

65. manmana bhava madbhakto
madyajt mar namaskuru
mam evai ’syasi satyam te
pratijane priyo ’si me
(65) Fix thy mind on Me; be devoted to Me; sacrifice to Me;
prostrate thyself before Me; so shalt thou come to Me. I
promise thee truly, for thou art dear to Me.

The ultimate mystery, the supreme teaching with which the
teacher wound up Chapter IX (34) is repeated here.

Thought, worship, sacrifice and reverence, all must be directed
to the Lord. We must let ourselves go in a simple, sustained,
trustful surrender of oneself to God, open ourselves out to Him
in the words of the Christian hymn.

O Love, I give myself to Thee,
Thine ever, only Thine to be.

God discloses His nature, His graciousness and love and eager-
ness to take us back to Him. He is waiting, ready to enter and
take possession of us, if only we open our hearts to Him. Our
spiritual life depends as much on our going to Him, as on His
coming to us. It is not only our ascent to God but His descent
to man. Look at the words of the poet Tagore:

Hast thou not heard His silent steps?
He comes, comes, ever comes.

The love of God is pressing in on our souls and if we throw our-
selves open to His perpetual coming, He will enter our soul,
cleanse and redeem our nature and make us shine like a blazing
light. God, who is ever ready to help, is waiting only for our
trustful appeal to Him.378 The Bhagavadgita

66. sarvadharman parityajya
mam ekant Saranam vraja
aharn tva sarvapapebhyo
moksayisyami ma Sucah

(66) Abandoning all duties, come to Me alone for shelter.
Be not grieved, for I shall release thee from all evils.

We should willingly yield to His pressure, completely surrender
to His will and take shelter in His love. If we destroy confidence
in our own little self and replace it by perfect confidence in God
He will save us. God asks of us total self-giving and gives us in
return the power of the spirit which changes every situation.

Arjuna was perturbed by the various duties, ritualistic and
ethical, that the war will result in the confusion of castes and in-
difference to the ancestors as well as in the violation of sacred
duties of reverence for the teachers, etc. Krsna tells him not to
worry about these laws and usages but to trust Him and bow to
His will. If he consecrates his life, actions, feelings and thoughts.
and surrenders himself to God, He will guide him through the fight
of life and he need have no fears. Surrender is the easiest way to
self-transcendence. “He only is fit to contemplate the Divine
light who is the slave to nothing, not even to his virtues.”
Ruysbroeck.

If we are to realize our destinies, we must stand naked and
guileless before the Supreme. We, now and then, vainly try to
cover ourselves up and hide the truth from the Lord. That way
the gopis failed to realize their destinies.

We do not even seck God as await His touch. When we turn
to Him and let Him fill our whole being, our responsibility ceases.
He deals with us and leads us beyond all sorrow. It is an
unreserved surrender to the Supreme who takes us up and raises
us to our utmost possible perfection. Though the Lord conducts
the world according to fixed laws and expects us to conform to
the law of right action based on our nature and station in life,
if we take shelter in Him, we transcend all these. A seemingly outer
help must come to man, for his soul cannot deliver itself from the
trap in which it is caught by its own effort. When we wait on God
without words and desire only His taking hold of us, the help
comes. Cp. “‘He, who cares nothing for merits and demerits evenXVIII. Conclusion 379

though taught by Me, who, setting aside all duties, serves Me
alone, is the greatest.”

The followers of R. look upon this verse as the carama Sloka
or the final verse of the whole book.

The Reward of following the Doctrine
67 idam te na ’tapaskaya
na ’bhaktaya kadacana
na ca ’Susrisave vacyam
na ca man yo 'bhyastiyati
(67) Never is this to be spoken by thee to one who is not
austere in life or who has no devotion in him or who is not
obedient or who speaks ill of Me.
Only those who are disciplined, loving and have a desire to
serve are capable of understanding the message; others may listen
to it and abuse it.

68. ya idam paramam guhyam
madbhaktesv abhidhasyatt
bhaktivn mayi param krtvd
mam evat ’syaty asamsayah
(68) He who teaches this supreme secret to My devotees,
showing the highest devotion to Me, shall doubtless come
to Me.
It is the duty of those who are previously initiated to initiate
their uninitiated brethren >

69. na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priyakritamah
bhavita na ca me tasmad
anyah priyataro bhuvi
¥ ajfatvaivam gunin dosan mayadistan api svakan
dharman samtyajya yah sarvan bhajet sa ki satiamah,
+ asarashytis tu samsharyah bhratrbhnk pirvasamshrtath.
Cp. durjanah sajjano bhiyat sajjanah Santim apnuyat
Santo mucyeta bandhebkyo muktas canyan vimocayet.

May the wicked become virtuous, may the virtuous attain tranquillity,
may the tranquil be freed from bonds, may the freed make others
ree,380 The Bhagavadgita

(69) There is none among men who does dearer service to
Me than he; nor shall there be another dearer to Me in the
world.

The great ones who have crossed the ocean of sarnsara and help
others to cross are the dearest to God.

70. adhyesyate ca ya imam
*  dharmyam samvadam dvayoh
jhanayajhiena tend ’ham
istah sydm iti me matih

(70) And he who studies this sacred dialogue of ours, by him
I would be worshipped through the sacrifice of knowledge,
so I hold.

71. Sraddhavan anasiiyas ca
Srnuyad api yo narah
so pi muktah subhaml lokan
pripnuyat punyakarmanam
(71) And the man who listens to it with faith and without

scoffing, even he, being liberated, shall attain to the happy
worlds of the righteous.

72. kaccid etac chrutam partha
tvayai ’kagrena cetasa
kaccid ajftanasammohah

pranastas te dhanamjaya

(72) O Partha (Arjuna), has this been heard by thee with
thy thought fixed to one point? O Winner of wealth (Arjuna),
has thy distraction (of thought) caused by ignorance been
dispelled?

Conclusion

arjuna uvaca
73. nasto mohah smrtir labdha
tvatprasadan mayéa ’cyuta
sthito ’smi gatasamdehah
Rarisye vacanam tavaXVIII. Conclusion 381

Arjuna said:
(73) Destroyed is my delusion and recognition has been
gained by me through Thy grace, O Acyuta (Krsna). I stand
firm with my doubts dispelled. I shall act according to Thy
word.

Arjuna turns to his appointed action, not with an egoistic mind
but with self-knowledge. His illusions are destroyed, his doubts
are dispelled. The chosen instrument of God takes up the duty
set to it by the Lord of the world. He will now do God’s bidding.
He realizes that He made us for His ends, not our own. Freedom
to choose rightly depends on moral training. Through sheer good-
ness we rise up to a liberty of spirit, which carries us out of the
grossness to which the flesh is prone. Arjuna had the onset of
temptation and won his way to a liberating victory. He feels
that he will fulfil the command of God as He is there to strengthen
him. It is our duty to live in the spirit of the verse, “As I am
ordained by Thee, O Hysikesa, seated in my heart, so I act.”2
Jesus says: “I seek not my own will but the will of Him who
sent me.” We must live as God would have us live in His eternal
life. To will what God wills is the secret of diving life. When
Jesus cried ‘May this cup pass from me,” He was yet having His
own preferences and asked for personal satisfaction. He wished
to escape the bitter humiliation and death, but when He uttered
“Thy will be done,” “karisye vacanam tava,” he gave up His
separate existence and identified Himself with the work of the
Father who sent Him.3 This evolution means a great shedding
of all pretences and evasions, a stripping of all sheaths, a
vastrapaharana, the self-naughting of the soul.

samjaya uvaca

74. ity aham vasudevasya
parthasya ca mahatmanah
samvddam imam asrausam
adbhutam romaharsanam

1 ajia@nasartmohandsa Gtmasmytilabhah. S.

+ wayd hysthesa hydi sthitena, yatha niyuktosmi tatha karomi,

3. Mark xiv, 32-41. “As the Father gave me commandment, even
so I do.” John xiv, 31.382 The Bhagavadgita

Sarjaya said:
(74) Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue between
Vasudeva (Krsna) and the high-souled Partha (Arjuna)
causing my hair to stand on end

75. vydsaprasadac chrutavan
etad guhyam aham param
yogam yogesvarat krsnat
saksat kathayatah svayam
(75) By the grace of Vyasa, I heard this supreme secret, this
yoga taught by Krsna himself, the Lord of yoga, in person
Vyasa granted to Sarhjaya the power to see and hear from a
distance all that transpired on the battlefield so that he might
report the events to the blind King Dhrtarastra.

76. rajan samsmrtya-samsmrtya
sanwadam imam adbhutam
keSavarjunayoh punvam
hrsyami ca muhur-muhuh
(76) O King, as I recall again and again this dialogue,
wondrous and holy; of KeSava (Krsna) and Arjuna, I thrill
with joy again and again.

77. tac ca samsmrtya-samsmrtya
viipam atyadbhutam hareh
vismayo me mahan rajan
hysyami ca punah-punah
(77) And as often as I recall that most wondrous form of
Hari (Krsna), great is my astonishment, O King, and I thrill
with joy again and again.
samsmytya,samsmytya: as often as I recall. Thedialogue of Krsna
and Arjuna and the fact of God are not philosophical proposi
tions but are spiritual facts. We do not learn their meaning by
simply recounting them but by dwelling upon them in a spirit
of prayer and meditation
78, yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra partho dhanurdharah
tatra Sriv vijayo bhittir
dhruva nitir matir mamaXVIII. Conclusion 383

(78) Wherever there is Krsna, the lord of yoga, and Partha
(Arjuna), the archer, I tl , there will surely be fortune,
victory, welfare and morality.

The teaching of the Gita is yoga and the teacher is yogesvara.
When the human soul becomes enlightened and united with the
Divine, fortune and victory, welfare and morality are assured.
We are called upon to unite vision (yoga) and energy (dhanuh)
and not allow the former to degenerate into madness or the latter
into savagery. “The great centralities of religion,” as Baron Von
Hugel loved to call them, the tremendous facts of life divine
are yoga, the realization of God through worship and entire
submission to His will and dhanuh or active participation in the
furtherance of the cosmic plan. Spiritual vision and social service
should go together. The double purpose of human life, personal
perfection and social efficiency is indicated here.t When Plato
prophesied that there would be no good government in the world
until philosophers became kings, he meant that human perfection
was a sort of marriage between high thought and just action.
This, according to the Gitd, must be, for ever, the aim of man.

 

iti... moksasamnyasayogo nama ’stadaso 'dhyayah
titi Srtmadbhagavadgita upanisadah samaptah
This is the eighteenth chapter entitled The Yoga of Release

by Renunciation.
Here the Bhagavadgita-Upanisad ends.

« Cp “That holy world I fain would know, wherein the priesthood
and the kingship move together in one accord.” Vajasaneyi Sarhhita
XX, 5.Selected Bibliography

K. T. Teranc: The Bhagavadgita. 1882.

Epwin ARNOLD: The Song Celestial 1885.

A. Mawapeva SAsrrt: The Bhagavadgita 1gox.

L. D. Barnett: The Bhagavaigita. 1905

Annie Besant and Buacavan Das. Bhagavadgita. 1905.

Sri AUROBINDO: Essays on the Gita. 1928.

W. Dovuctas P. Hitr: The Bhagavadgita. 1928.

B. G. Trrak: Gitarahasya. E.T. 1935.

D. S. Sarma: The Bhagavadgita 1937.

FRANKLIN EpcErtTon: The Bhagavadgita 1944.

SWAMI PRABHAVANANDA and CHRISTOPHER ISHERWOOD:
The Bhagavadgita 1945.

Mawapev Desai: The Gité according to Gandhi 1946.INDEX

Abhinavagupta, passim

Abul Fazl, 159 n.

Adams, Henry, 181 n.

Adhyétma Rémayana, 72 n.

‘Ain-Akbart, 159 2.

Akbar, 159 n.

‘Alexander Samuel, 129

Amarakosa, 149, 332 2.

Amrtatarahgins, 20 1.

Anandagiri, 16, 32n., 720.,
133, 143, TOU, 242, 258, 312,
317, 318 322, his Samkara-
diguyaya, 20

Aparoksanubhite, 96 n.

Apastamba’s Dharma Siitra, 118

Apostles’ Creed, The, 32 n.

Aquinas, St. Thomas, his Summa
Theologica, 71 0., 141 n., 376

Aristotle, 190, 214

Arius, 35.0.

Amold, Sir Edwin, 6, 68 n.

Astavakragita, 163, 164

Atharva Veda, 59 n., 197 0.

Attar, 371
Augustine, St. 63 bis Con-
fessions, 152

Aurobindo Sri, 20
Avadhiitagita, 63 n., 293
Avimara, 176

Badarayana, 303

Barnett, L. D., 15

Baudhayana Dharma Sitra, 25%

Bergson Henri, 311

Bhagavata Purana, 24 290., 35,
36, 40, 60, 61, 65n., 660.
73 2., 154, 156, 183, 186 214
223, 243, 294, 343

Bhagavata religion, 30 59, 67,

176

Bhaktivatnavah 64 n.

Bhoja. 60

Blochmanan, 160n

Boehme, Jacob, 25n., r90n.,
193n.;his Three Principles, 230.

 

Boethius, 53, 140
Bonaventura, 376
Brahma Sidra, 16, 411. 215n.,

303
Brhad-aranyaka Up., 21, 220.,
24 0., 107 0., 307, 336, 353

Brhannaradiya, 159 0.

Brhaspati Stra, 337

Browne, his A Literary History
of Persia, 37.

Bruno, Giordano, 119

Buddha, Gautama, The, 21 n.,
IZOD., 153, 157, 222, 245,
253 0., 254, 344

Burnet, John, bis Early Greek
Philosophy, 253

Caitanya, 253 n., his Siksastaka,
6on,

Calvin, 63
Chandogya Up., 28, 182, 197,
216, 228, 284, 334, 345
Constantine, 271
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K., his
Hinduism and Buddhism, 166
Corinthians, 71 0.

Descartes, 45

Dhammapada, 91n., 129, 189,
365

Dionysius, the Areopagite, 22 n.,

307
Draupadi, 97
Duns Scotus, 376

Eckhart, 22 n., 208

Edgerton, Professor Franklin, 6,
308

Emerson,
107 0.

Exodus, 272 n.

Ezekiel, The Vision of, 272 n.

178n., his Brahma,

Farquhar’s Outhne of the Re-
ligious Literature of India, 14 n.386

Fitzgerald, 166 n.
Fraser, 251 0.

Galatians, 71 n.

Gandhi, M. K., 9, 20; his Songs
from Prison, 293 n., 299

Garbe, 14

Garuda Purana, 2520

Goethe, 128, 343

Hardy, Thomas, 198n, 3747.
Harivarisa, 29 n.

Haver, J. W., 110.
Heard, Gerald, his Man the
Master, 367 n.

Heliodorus, 29
Hibbert Journal, 11 n.
Hildegard, St., 270 n.
Hiriyanna, Professor M., 6
Hitopadesa, 79, 110 356
Holtzmann, 14
Hooker’s Ecclestastical Polity,

330.
Hopkins, his Religions of India,

14
Hnugel, Baron Von, 383
Huxley, Aldous, 12

Ibrahim Adham, 371

Imitation, 105 n.

Ia Up., 210., 220., 42, 67,
72, 117, 307

Isaiah, 272 n., 284, 317

Isherwood, Christopher, 12

Jacobi, 15
faimintya Up., 71 0.
fami, 190 n.
Janaka, 72, 73
Jesus Christ, 21 n., 31 n., 35n.,
36n., 370., 140, 152, 153,
254, 270, 285, 208, 338, 381
Jianasamkalini Tantra, 197
Joan of Arc, 271
Job, 281
John, The Gospel according to,

5g, {1poth.

  

 

3In., 6F n., 72
John, St. ‘of thgs

 

The Bhagavadgita

John, St., of Damascus 21 n.,

293 n.
Jung's, The Integration 0} Per-
sonality, 56 n.

Kialidasa’s Kumarasambhava,
125 n., his Raghuvaméa, 231 n.

Kapila, 264

Katha Up., 22n., 23n., 410,
85n., 107, 108, 111, 115-16,
117, 149 179, 231 3¢
326, 328

Kausitakt Brahmana, 28
Kausitakt Up , 31

Kena Up., 238
Kesavakasmirin, 19
Keith, Professor A. B., 15
Kularnava Tantra, 202

Lao Tze, 21.

Lawa’ih, 190 n

Lawrence, Brother, his Practice
of the Presence of God, 1830

Loisy, A., 37 0.

Tucretins's ‘De Rerum Natura

Lute! The Gospel according 10,
31 n., 1950

Luther, 1140

MacKenna, Stephen, 22 n.

Macnicol’s Psalms of the Maratha
Saints, 224 n.

Madhavaparasara, 208 n.

Madhusidana, passim.

Madhva, passim.

Mahabharata, passim.

Mahavastu, 60 n.

Mahavira, 152

Mahayana Buddhism, 157

Mahayanasraddhotpatti, 11

Mautrayani Up., 1590 263 n.,
jor n.

Maityi Up., 209 n.

Majjhima Nikaya, 65 0.

Mandanamisra’s ‘Brahmasiddhi,

742.
Mandikya Up., 227, 349
fiqut-Tair, 166Index

Manu, 810., 136, 148. 189,
197 2.

Marathes, 251 n.

Mark, The Gospel according to,
31 0., 270, 381 n.

Marx, 96

Matthew, The Gospel according
to, 193 n., 298 n.

Megasthenes, 29

Milindapaniha, 85 n., 152

Moffatt, 157 n.

Moksadharma, 108, 272 n.

Montesquieu, 253 n.

Mundaka Up., 220., 23n., 56,
117, 215, 284, 305 0., 307, 328,

333

Narada Bhakti Siitra, 60
Narada Paficaratra, 41 n., 61 n.
Newton, 181 n.

Nicene Creed, The, 32 n.
Nicholson, R: A., his 4 Literary
History of the Arabs, 247 n.

Niddesa, 29

Nietzsche, 129

Nilakantha, passim.

Nimbarka, 19

Norris, W E., his Thirlby Hall,

347
Nyaya Stra, 71

Old Testament, 214, 285

Origen, 193

Orphic Tablets, 326 n.

Orphism, 253 n.

Otto Rudolf, 282, his The On-
ginal Gita

Padma Purana, 26 0.

Paricadasi, 42 n.

Panini, 28'n.

Pascal, 104

Patacdra, 110 n,

Pataiijalis Makabhasya, 29

Patafgali's Yoga Sitra, 56, 60,
25, 196, 206, 232

Paul, St., 63, 281

Pelagius, 63

 

387

Petre, Miss Maude, her Loisy,
372.

Philo, 203

Plato, 22, 196, 203, 214, 227,
261, 265, 316, 383; his Alct-
biades, 266; Laws 85 n., 194,
343; Meno, 94; Phaedo, 122n.,
129 n., 170 n.; Timaeus, 326 n.

Plotinus, 21n., 22m. 540,
102 n., 170 0., 196, 203

Pontius Pilate, 21 n.

Prabhavananda Svami, 12

Prahlada, 64, 65

Prasna Up., 197, 228

Proclus, 39 0.

Proverbs, The Book of, 193

Psalms, 285

Psalms of the Sisters, t10 0.

Purusa Saikta, 268 n.

Pythagoras, 195

 

Rabr'a, 247 n.

Radha Up., 41 n.

Ramanuja, passim.

Ramayana, 253 2.

Revelation, 272 n.

Rhys Davids, Mrs., tron,

Re. Veda, 2tn., 23n., 25, 26,
28n, 30, 59, 97, 1361. 137,

155, 242 246, 268 n., 285,
334,

Rilke’s Letters to a Young Poet,
1940.

Rodin, 197 n.

Romans, Epistle to the, 63, 157 n.
Rimi, 23 n.
Ruysbroeck, 378

Sabellus, 35 0.

Saddharmapwndariha, 11, 153,

2720.

Sales, St. Francis de, 373

Sama Veda, 263

Sarnkara, passim.

Sathkarananda, 329

Sanalsujatiya, 70

Sandilya's Bhakti Sutra, 42 n.,60,
61

Sertre,-Jean-Paul, 254388

Saul, 270
Savitri, 346
Schrader, F. A.’s, Kashmer
Rescension of the Bhagavadgita,

152.

Secret of the Golden Flower, The,
185 n.

Shams-1-Tabriz, 23 0

Silesius Angelus, 22 n, 360

Singer, Charles, Studies im the
History and Method of Science,
27In.

Socrates, 84, 109, 194, 203, 316,

359
Soothill’s, The Three Religions of
China, 212.
Spinoza, 37 n., 148 n.
Sridhara, passim.
Sukla Yajur Veda, 27 n.
Stiryagita, 296

Suso, 103
Svetagvatara Up., 14 0., 15, 22 n.,
23, 42M, II§nN., 179, 230,

301 n., 306, 307, 332

Tagore, Rabindranath 377

Taittiviya Avanyaka, 2

Taittiviya Brahmana, 242 n.

Taitiriya Samhita, 137

Tauttiriya Up., 22, 26n., 43,
326 1., 349

Tauler, 71 0., 960.

Tevijja Sutta, 157

Tilak, B. G., 20

Trinity, 24 n., 25 n.

 

The Bhagavadgita

Tukaram, 224, 251, 292
Tulsidas, 252, 299

Udayanacarya, 159
Uncensored Recollections, 347
Upamsads, passim.
Uttaragita, 71

Varsnaviya Tantrasava, 13
Vajasaneyi Samhita, 103 0.
Varuna, 155
Varus, Quintilian, 253 n.
Vallabha’s Amrtatarangini, 19
Vedanta Desika, 164
Vedantaratnamanjisa, 26 n.
Visnu Purana, 65n., 66, 670.,
154 N., 219, 266, 298
Visnusmrti, 104
Viwekacisdamani, 78
Vyaghrapida, 208 n.
Vyasa, 115 n.

Waterhouse, Elizabeth, her
Thoughts of a Tertiary, 159 n.

Whinfield, 190 n.

Wilhelm, 185 n

Woolman, John, 51 n.

Wordsworth, 133 n., 148n., 194.

Yajaavalkya Smyts, 70 n., 197 0.

Yajur Veda, 285

‘Yamundcarya's Agamapramanya,
2gn., his Gitarthasamgraha,
17,150

Yogabhasya, 203 n.

Yogavasistha, 63 n., 139 0., 238 n.THE
BHAGAVADGITA

With an Introductory Essay
Sanskrit Text, English Translation
and Notes by

S. RADHAKRISHNAN

BOMBAY
GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN (INDIA) PRIVATE LIMITED