Modern Intellectual History, 7, 2 (2010), pp. 297–317
doi:10.1017/S1479244310000089

!
C Cambridge University Press 2010

corrigibility, allegory,
universality: a history of the
gita’s transnational reception,
1785–1945∗
mishka sinha
Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, University of Cambridge
E-mail: mishka.sinha@gmail.com

This essay lays out a history of the translation, interpretation, transmission and
reception of the Bhagavad Gita as a cultural, religious and philosophical text in the
West from 1785 to 1945; in doing so it focuses primarily on Britain, although it also
refers to other contexts of reception where they are connected to the British context,
or to present revealing or helpful comparisons. The object of the essay is to investigate
relationships between the Gita’s interpretive history and assumptions about the Gita,
both as a transcultural philosophical source and as an essentially Hindu religious text,
which have been in place since the twentieth century. Although there have been other
transnational surveys and histories of the Gita’s translation, this essay differs from
them in positing a specific period of interpretation between the end of the nineteenth
century and the beginning of the twentieth, during which time, it argues, the Gita as
a received and translated text was significantly altered in certain specific ways which
continue to influence its present understanding both in the West and in India.

The Gita lends itself easily to interpretation.1 The tractability of the Gita
has vital roots in ambiguities inherent to its structure and its place within
the Mahabharata epic: the heterogeneity of its narrative material suggests that
rather than being a unified composition, the Gita may be a combination of
∗

1

Grateful thanks to Professor David Armitage for his kind comments and invaluable
discussion of this paper, which were integral to the shaping of its final form; to Dr Shruti
Kapila, Dr Faisal Devji and Professor Sir Chris Bayly for their generous help; and to
Dr Prashant Kidambi for his extremely useful suggestions.
I am indebted to scholars who have explored the Gita’s interpretive flexibility in discussions
of its reception within transnational contexts, especially Gerald James Larson, “The
‘Bhagavad-Gita’ as Cross-cultural Process: Towards an Analysis of the Social Locations of
a Religious Text”, Journal of the American Academy of Religion 43/4 (Dec. 1975), 651–69; Eric
J. Sharpe, The Universal Gı̄tā: Western Images of the Bhagavadgiı̄tā, a Bicentenary Survey
(London: Duckworth, 1985); and Catherine A. Robinson, Interpretations of the BhagavadGı̄tā and Images of the Hindu Tradition: the Song of the Lord (London: Routledge, 2006).

297

298 mishka sinha

older sections with later interpolations,2 and, moreover, may itself be a late
insertion into the fabric of the Mahabharata. The Gita’s adaptability to different
kinds of philosophical interpretation is fundamentally shaped by the fact that
its composer(s) reconciled within it several philosophical darśanās, including
fundamental concepts from Sāṅkhya and Yoga, with newer devotional aspects
associated with the rise of Bhaktı̄ traditions. Within the Brahmanical tradition
the text further possesses a certain ambiguity of status: despite being of smārta3
rather than śrauta4 origin, the Gita was given a special position, and treated as
distinct from most other smr.ti literature by commentators as early as Śaṅkara
in the ninth century. This quality of being assigned semi-doctrinal status while
being neither scripture nor revealed religion has, as shall be seen below, persistent
echoes in the Gita’s reception in the modern period.
This essay traces the metamorphosis of the Gita from a text of contained
circulation within an enclaved Brahmanical tradition in India, through a period
in which it was the subject of circumspect curiosity and limited interest, into a
text of transnational significance.
In Truth and Method,5 Hans-Georg Gadamer argued for a philosophical
hermeneutics which assumed a historically effected consciousness (Wirkungsgeschichtlichen Bewußtsein) for any interpreter of a text. Therefore the
interpretation of a text requires and results in a fusion of horizons
(Horizontverschmelzung), that of the text and that of the interpreter himself,
each informing and articulating the other. My reading of the history of the Gita’s
interpretation suggests that a third “horizon” or plane of reference must be
recognized: a historical consciousness, present within both interpreter and text,
of previous interpretations and their contexts, which affect and are retrospectively
affected by each new interpretation of the Gita. Thus if the text and the interpreter
of the text each has a history, the interpretation and reception of the text also
has its own history, which must be taken into account. The third horizon, that
of reception, enters the Horizontverschmelzung and alters the conditions under
which interpreter and text encounter each other, and the manner in which both
are eventually encountered by the reader. The various interpretations of the Gita
discussed here, which were written in the period between 1880 and 1910, are related
by family resemblances that pertain to specific qualities: namely the allegorical

2

3
4
5

Larson, “The ‘Bhagavad-Gita’”, 659, suggests that the Gita was composed between 200
BCE and 200 CE. Angelika Malinar recognizes 400 BCE to 400 CE as a broader general
period of composition.
Remembered/traditional.
Heard/revealed.
Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and method, trans. from the German, trans. ed. by Garrett
Barden and John Cumming (London: Sheed & Ward, 1975).

corrigibility, allegory, universality

representation, the assumption of universal relevance and the production of
transcultural significance through collaborative and contrapuntal engagements
between Indian and Western translators. Collectively, they form a composite
horizon of interpretation which continues to be inherited by new readers and
interpreters as a historicized presence of a defining interpretive past.
There is a moment of critical mass in the history of the Gita’s reception. A
brief perusal of any international bibliography of the Gita reveals that from about
1880 the number of translations of the Gita began to rise steeply, both in English
and in other European languages, while translation into Indian vernaculars also
increased at the same time.6 At this juncture the text began to occupy a new
cultural space within a transnational context, and initiated the construction of a
popular tradition in the West.
Scholars have previously noted the importance of the sudden increase in
translations of the Gita from the 1880s,7 and the importance of the history of the
Gita’s translation and interpretation in the West to its significance within Indian
national history and the history of neo-Hinduism.8 However, this essay argues
that the manner in which the Gita was received and understood as a cultural,
religious, spiritual and philosophical text was transformed over a comparatively
brief period, in a process which had an enormous and yet largely unrecognized
impact on the reception and interpretation of the Gita from the twentieth century.
The primary elements of the argument of this essay are as follows:
• Instead of a smooth trajectory of increase and expansion in the period after
1880 as previous studies have suggested, there was a specific and exceptionally
generative period of about three decades between 1880 and 1910, during
which the scope of the Gita’s influence and the potential for its interpretation
underwent a radical metamorphosis.
• This transformation was a consequence of the Gita’s translocation into an
international context, yet it was produced through a dialogic and dialectical
transnational process within which Indian and European/American
translation and commentary informed, and intervened in, each other’s
interpretations.
• Finally, the process of translation effectively isolated and emphasized two
particular qualities which have since become unquestioned assumptions for
most modern interpretations of the Gita. These are, first, that the Gita is
essentially an allegorical construction, which uses symbols and metaphors to

6

7
8

E.g. J. C. Kapoor, Bhagavad-Gita, an International Bibliography of 1785–1979 Imprints (New
York: Garland Publishers, 1983).
Sharpe, The Universal Gı̄tā, 62–3.
Larson, “The ‘Bhagavad-Gita’”, 665–6; and Introduction to Robinson, Interpretations.

299

300 mishka sinha

put across hidden truths of spiritual significance; and, second, that it is a text
of universal relevance.9
The shift in interpretive meaning which transformed the Gita between 1880 and
1910 occurred through the mediation of several translations, often in concourse
with each other. These, and the interpretations and receptions accompanying
them, had the cumulative effect of constructing a new set of assumptions and
frameworks for receiving, interpreting and understanding the Gita. In other
words, a “community of meaning” was evolved through an integrally dialogic
process, which not only changed the reception of the Gita in the West but also
played an important role in repositioning the Gita within the formation of neoHinduism, as well as in the Indian national movement.

the early history of translation
When Charles Wilkins translated the Gita into English in 1785, under the aegis
of the East India Company, it amounted to a paradigm shift in the history of
the interpretation of the Gita and the intellectual history of Western knowledge
of the East. Wilkins’s translation “carried the text over”10 into a new cultural
context, giving it unprecedented scope for an extraordinary breadth of meaning
and influence.
Wilkins’s Bhagavat Geeta or the Dialogues of Kreeshna and Arjoon was the first
text widely known to have been directly translated from Sanskrit into a European
language.11 The Bhagavat Geeta was thus received in Europe with curiosity and
interest as the first textual example of Indian culture directly encountered there.
The curiosity occasioned by the Gita was to be its defining characteristic for most
of its first hundred years in the West. As a result, its content was eclipsed by the
novelty of its context and the popular interest in the language and culture of
recently acquired British territories in India.
Charles Wilkins and Warren Hastings, Governor General of Bengal from
1773 to 1785, and chief supporter and instigator in Wilkins’s Sanskrit researches,
began their comments on the Bhagavat Geeta by emphasizing its “curiosity”
as a cultural object. They surmised correctly that this aspect would ultimately
prove the most significant attraction for their readers in England.12 Hastings
9

10
11

12

The boundaries of this “universality” depend on the interpretive context – for example,
whether they extend to include all Hindus, or all Indians, or all humans.
Taking the Latin word translatio.
Charles Wilkins, Bhagvat Geeta or the Dialogues of Kreeshna and Arjoon (London: Nourse,
1785).
See p. v of Hastings’ “Introduction” and p. xvi of Wilkins’ “Translator’s Preface”, in the
1849 reprint of the original text, edited by Rev. J. Garrett.

corrigibility, allegory, universality

and Wilkins’s attempts to provide a wider sense of the text’s value as literature
and as philosophical doctrine within its own cultural context13 found a largely
hostile reception in answer to their apparent proposal to “exchange the
most metaphysical of . . . [their] . . . own received doctrines, for others so much
more abstruse, that the utmost stretch of mind on this hemisphere cannot
comprehend”.14
For early readers the primary value of texts retrieved from the unkown past
of the distant East lay in their ability to convey pleasure and pique curiosity by
emphasizing the difference between their readers and the people who produced
them. As an early review put it, in the “history of the human mind, our curiosity
is irresistibly attracted by those pages, which exhibit manners and opinions
far removed from our own . . . [to which] we liken with peculiar pleasure”.15
Ultimately, its reviewers reckoned, the Gita’s importance lay not in any intrinsic
quality it may have possessed, but in its value as “a curious specimen of
mythology and . . . an authentic standard of the faith and religious opinions of the
Hindoos”.16
Despite a favourable initial reception, Wilkins’s translation did not achieve
lasting popularity in its early decades. In 1846, the editor of a multilingual edition
of the Gita which had been produced for missionaries in India observed that
his own book filled an important gap, since, despite its being long held in high
repute, the English translation of the Gita had now become scarce.17
The wider audience for Wilkins’s work in Britain, apart from those with
scholarly, missionary or commercial interests in India, was an important section
of the literate public. Until well into the second half of the eighteenth century the
majority of this readership was primarily interested in traveller’s tales, however
wild and fanciful.18 Yet their guaranteed audience was equally an indication of an
eclectic curiosity about the manners and customs of non-Christian peoples and
faraway lands, which was broadened and educated by the literary and linguistic
discoveries of the late eighteenth century, but which, by the 1830s, was on the

13

14
15
16
17

18

“Remarks on the Dialogues of Kreeshna and Arjoon”, Gentleman’s Magazine LV/12/2 (Oct.
1785), 955–7.
Anonymous review, Gentleman’s Magazine 55/12 (December 1875), 955–7, 957.
Monthly Review 1 (1785), Article II, 198–210 and 295–301.
Ibid.
Rev. J. Garrett, ed., The Bhagavat Geeta or Dialogues of Krishna and Arjoon in Eighteen
Lectures. Sanskrit Canarese and English in Parallel Columns. The Canarese newly translated
from the Sanskrit, and the English from the translation by Sir Charles Wilkins (Bangalore:
Wesleyan Mission Press, 1846).
See, for example, J. Z. Holwell’s Interesting Historical Events, Relative to the Provinces of
Bengal, and the Empire of Indostan, 3 vols. (London, 1765–71).

301

302 mishka sinha

decline.19 After Macaulay’s crucial 1835 “Minute on Indian Education”,20 with
few exceptions, academic and scholarly interest in India also lost ground, as
the ascendancy of evangelical groups and Utilitarian ideals, and the influence of
James Mill, shaped the temper of British intellectual attitudes to India.21
In this, Britain was the exception in nineteenth-century Europe, and even
though the scholarly pursuit of Sanskrit studies and Indology in America was
established later than in Europe, there, too, intellectual and cultural interest in
India increased throughout the century. However, despite being the first Sanskrit
text to be widely accessible in the West, the Gita was easily outdone in its impact
in Europe as well as in America, in the early period of Western translations from
Sanskrit, by Sacontalá or the Fatal Ring, William Jones’s translation of Kalidasa’s
play, published in 1789. Jones was one of the earliest European scholars to note the
correspondences between Sanskrit, Greek and Latin, and to suggest a common
origin for these languages.22 The idea of an Indo-European “mother-tongue”,
with Sanskrit as the favoured contender, shaped the course of nineteenth-century
oriental studies, seeding a new “science” of comparative philology which became
a defining scholarly enterprise for a century absorbed with questions of origins,
and interconnections between language, race and culture. The early fascination
with classical texts such as Sacontalá was replaced by a deepening obsession with
the older literature of the Vedas and Vedanta, fuelled by the publication of the
Oupnek’hat (1802–4), a Latin translation of the Upanis.ads by the French Jesuit

19

20

21
22

This is well illustrated by the diminishing numbers of articles on India in British journals,
such as the Edinburgh Review, for instance, from the early 1800s to the 1830s.
T. B. Macaulay was a Whig politician, historian, and, from 1834, member of the Supreme
Council of India. His “Minute on Indian Education” (1834) persuaded the GovernorGeneral to adopt English, rather than Sanskrit or Arabic, as the medium of instruction in
higher education in India. The Orientalists, including scholars and government officials
such as H. H. Wilson, had maintained the importance of instruction in Indian languages,
and of the need to educate Indians about their own texts and traditions. Macaulay, who
was unversed in oriental studies, argued that modern European knowledge was superior
to Asian knowledge, and that proficiency in English would be of greater benefit to Indians
than Indian languages. Macaulay’s minute laid the foundation for higher education in
India as well as a colonial system based on the cooperation of English-speaking Indians:
it also catalysed the sharp decline in the value assigned to Indian languages, culture and
history in Britain for the next century and more.
James Mill, The History of British India (London: Baldwin, Cradock and Joy, 1817).
Jones was one of the earliest scholars known to have noticed the philological relationship,
although it may have been noted previously by medieval scholars working in Persian or
Arabic. There is at least one European contender for Jones’s status: see John J. Godfrey,
“Sir William Jones and Pere Coeurdoux: A Philological Footnote,” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 87/1 (Jan.–March 1967), 57–9.

corrigibility, allegory, universality

philologist Abraham-Hyacinthe Anquetil Duperron.23 The Gita had neither the
literary polish and skilful composition of classical literature, nor the sublime
metaphysics of the Vedas, with their aura of grand antiquity, and hence remained
for three-quarters of a century both less well known and less frequently translated
than these.
Wilkins’s English translation was retranslated into Russian and French and
soon after into German and Greek. However, the earliest direct translation from
Sanskrit into German was not published until 1834, whilst the first direct French
translation was done in 1861 by Emile Burnouf, the less-famous younger brother
of Eugène Burnouf, Sanskrit professor at the Collège de France. The first direct
translation of the Gita into a European language after Wilkins’s was by August
von Schlegel, who held the first chair in Sanskrit in Germany. Schlegel published
a Latin translation of the Gita in 1823 along with the first critical edition in
Sanskrit by a European. Unlike Wilkins’s Gita, Schlegel’s critically edited text
represented a scholarly tradition of interest in Sanskrit and Indian philology
and philosophy which had come of age. Schlegel’s text showed that Wilkins’s
translation contained several inaccuracies, yet it was not followed by a new
English translation for seventy years.
The “recovery” of Sanskrit and its literary corpus and traditions for the West by
the East India Company became a symbol of both British political and economic
power and the ability and authority it conferred to gather for Western civilization
not only material largesse but also fabulous cultural wealth. The most vivid contemporary representation of the symbolic power of Sanskrit translation, and of
the Bhagavad Gita as the exemplar text brought forth by this power, was in William
Blake’s drawing The Brahmins (1809), which showed Charles Wilkins working on
his translation of the Gita with a group of Brahmins attendant upon him.
Blake’s drawing suggested that the importance of the Gita lay in its significance
as an object of secret knowledge recovered through intellectual labour and
imperial triumph from its hitherto unknowable form within a previously hidden
tradition. With few exceptions, for most of the first hundred years after it became
available in the West, this summed up the major significance of the translocated
Gita in its international context.

metamorphoses of the gita: 1880–1910
In the almost hundred years between 1785 and 1880, there were two extant
translations of the Gita in English, Charles Wilkins’s, and one brought out in 1855
by J. Cockburn Thomson—a former student of H. H. Wilson, the first Boden
23

Anquetil-Duperron’s version was based on the Persian translation written or
commissioned by Dara Shukoh.

303

304 mishka sinha

Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford. In the five years between 1880 and 1885 three new
translations in English were published in Britain.
The steep increase in the number of translations of the Gita from the final
decades of the nineteenth century onwards reflected an unprecedented expansion
in its popularity and influence. This was a result of a series of independent and
yet in some ways related translations and interpretations of the Gita which, in
conjunction, transformed its meaning and interpretation for the modern world.
The effects of this transformation were as vital to the reception of the Gita in
India as they were in the West.
Although there were other popular translations of the Gita during this period,
they did not, in my opinion, contribute as much as did the four described below
to the Gita’s modern metamorphosis, nor did they reflect the qualities which
may be taken as family resemblances appearing in, and connecting, these four
interpretations, each of which is integral to modern interpretations of the Gita:
the emphasis on allegory, the assumption of universality, and the presence of a
dialogic communication between Indian and Western interpreters which shape
these interpretations.24

sacred books of the east
The Bhagavad-Gı̄tā, translated by Kashinath Trimbak Telang, was published
in 1882 in the eighth volume of the Sacred Books of the East, edited by Friedrich
Max Müller. In the 1870s, when the series commenced, there was a growing public
appetite for doctrines which could provide frameworks for the movements of
heterodox spirituality that rose in an implacable tide at the end of the nineteenth
century. Publishing houses recognized a new and profitable market, and K. Paul,
Trench, Trübner and Company was an early player in the game, publishing The
Sacred Anthology: A Book of Ethical Scriptures,25 edited by Moncure Conway, and
dedicating a specialized Oriental Series to literary and religious texts from Eastern
traditions.
Max Müller’s choice of the term “sacred books” had a special significance for
the inclusion of the Gita in the series. Rejecting the word “Bible” as a generically
applicable term, and describing his search for a broader one, Müller stressed an
important distinction: “there are many books sacred which are not canonical, and

24

25

The only exception is Swami Vivekananda’s interpretation of the Gita in lectures delivered
in Europe, America and India, which shares these characteristics. However, Vivekananda’s
Gita was more important to the reception of the text within neo-Hindu movements in
India than in a transnational context.
The Sacred Anthology: A Book of Ethical Scriptures Collected and Edited by Moncure Conway
(London: Trübner and Company, 1873).

corrigibility, allegory, universality

it was in order not to exclude them from my Series, that I prefer the title Sacred
Books of the East”.26 This was an important difference since Müller could not have
included the Gita or the Vis.n.upurān.a in his series had they had to fit the category
of canonical. Müller, like his nineteenth-century German teachers, saw authority
and importance as inextricably connected with age and antiquity. In a letter to
William Gladstone, Müller wrote that he wished to direct the other’s interest to
the “real India”, in which lay the primitive origins of European culture:
It was a misfortune that all the early publications of Sanskrit texts belonged really to
the Renaissance of Sanskrit literature . . . [the] older literature in India, the Vedic and the
Buddhistic . . . is [where] . . . we can watch a real growth from the simplest beginnings to
the highest concepts which the human mind is capable of . . .27

Yet while it was not canonical, nor vital to the understanding of India, in Max
Müller’s estimation, the Gita was sacred in the Sanskrit tradition, and hence,
despite not being especially interesting to most nineteenth-century scholars, it
was included in the series.
Kashinath Trimbak Telang had previously published a verse translation of the
Gita in Bombay, but the version for the Sacred Books was in prose, and included
the Anugı̄tā and the Sanatsugātı̄ya. Telang was one of only three non-Western
contributors invited to write for the series, and one of two Indians, the other being
the celebrated R. G. Bhandarkar. Most other contributors were internationally
recognized scholars while Telang was comparatively obscure. Telang’s translation
combined a thorough knowledge of the Sanskrit tradition with a philological
and historical method very much part of a nineteenth-century European mode
of scholarship; it was meticulous and scholarly, but lacked significant literary or
poetic qualities that might have drawn a wider audience. Yet Telang’s Gita turned
out to be amongst the more popular books in the series, selling over two hundred
copies.28
Forty-nine volumes of Sacred Books were eventually published in two
series between 1879 and 1910. The cost of publishing this extraordinary and
expensive project was borne by Oxford University Press together with the British
Government in India.29 To foreground and frame the special nature of his project,
Max Müller, as a member of the board of delegates at the press, suggested that
a new category of publications be instituted which would be published not for
26

27
28

29

Friedrich Max Müller, The Life and Letters of the Honourable Friedrich Max Müller in
Two Volumes Edited by His Wife (Bombay, London and New York: Longmans, Green and
Company, 1903), Müller to Moncure Conway, 5 Jan. 1883, 2: 135.
Müller to W. E. Gladstone, 18 Jan. 1883, Life and Letters, 2: 138.
N. J. Girardot, “Max Muller’s ‘Sacred Books’ and the Nineteenth-Century Production of
the Comparative Science of Religions”, History of Religions 41/3 (Feb. 2002), 227 n. 27.
Müller, Life and Letters, 2: 10.

305

306 mishka sinha

profit but for the “advancement of sound learning”.30 The Oxford Clarendon
Press was accordingly instituted.
It is important to further contextualize Max Müller’s project, and the
new authority it conferred on the Gita, by its inclusion in another emergent
institutional innovation. The transformative integration and reconstitution of
oriental studies within British institutions of higher education occurred as part
of a larger transformation taking place in the medieval British universities and
British academia at this time. The important changes in academic institutions in
America during the nineteenth century followed the development of professorial
“research” universities in Germany.31 In Britain, the 1870s, when Max Müller had
reached the height of his academic and social influence, was the cusp of the
change; taking Oxford as the exemplar, “there was a dramatic passage from the
restrictive Anglican clerical, classical, and upper-class trappings of traditional
education to a newly liberalized, nationalistic, competitive, and middle-class
professional system”.32
Telang’s Gita received few public reviews. The reviewers of The Song Celestial,
published three years later, all noted previous translations of the Gita by Wilkins,
Cockburn Thomson and John Davies (1882); yet although Arnold himself
mentioned Telang’s translation as well as the other three, none of Arnold’s
reviewers mentioned Telang. The only reference I have found in contemporary
popular journals and newspapers to Telang’s Gita is a piece of witticism in a brief
article entitled “A Serious Series”:
A “Series of Sacred Books of the East,” edited by Professor Max Mueller, is now being
published. One of the volumes contains the Satapatha-Brahmana according to the text of
the school of Madhyandin; another comprises the “Pattimokkha” (who was he bye-thebye and why did he mock Patti?); while in volume eight is found “The Bhagavadgita with
the Sanātsugātiya, and the Anugı̄tā” translated by Kashinath Trimbak Telang, M.A. Fancy
sending your servant to a bookseller’s to ask for such works! Why, she would be sure to
drop half a dozen syllables on the road.33

Was the general reader disconcerted by the strange syllables composing Telang’s
name which added to the unfamiliarity of the Gita, or were the “serious”
scholarly trappings of the text not suited to a mass audience? Notwithstanding
its reception, through being included in the Sacred Books, Telang’s Gita was
absorbed into an integrated institutional structure which altered the text’s
presence in its international context. The Sacred Books represented a highly
30

31
32
33

Girardot, “Max Muller’s ‘Sacred Books’”, 228 n. 29. See Max Müller, “Statement to the
Delegates of the Oxford University press, 1878,” OUP Archive.
Girardot, “Max Muller’s ‘Sacred Books’”, 215–16.
Ibid., pp. 215–216.
Funny Folks, 3 June 1882.

corrigibility, allegory, universality

ambitious academic, cultural and political publishing project. They were selected
by Max Müller to represent a specific construction of sacredness that conferred
upon the texts he included a separate kind of social, cultural and institutional
authority which they reciprocally manifested and defined.34 Published within
such a structure the Gita became part of a new transnational, established
and authorized canon that could foundationally define what constituted an
internationally recognized sacred tradition.
The publication of the Gita in the Sacred Books was a collaborative process
involving an Indian translator and a Western figure of institutional authority as
well as immense popular authority on India. Their dialogical interaction gave the
Gita a new universal sanction.

the song celestial
Edwin Arnold’s translation, The Song Celestial, allowed the Gita to enter
a broader public consciousness. Arnold’s poem was in the grand tradition of
Dryden’s translation of Virgil, which brought the original closer to the reader,
rather than bringing the reader closer to the original, as Goethe had suggested
should be done to maintain fidelity while translating oriental texts. Rather than
attempt to reproduce the Gita “as it was”, The Song Celestial reinvented and, in
some contexts, replaced it.
By the time the Song Celestial appeared in 1885, Edwin Arnold was already a
highly regarded Victorian poet, well known for his oriental verse. In a Liverpool
newspaper, published on New Year’s Eve 1885, The Song Celestial is mentioned
under the Literature Section of a listing of the past year’s important events,
appearing beside works by Tennyson, Swinburne and George Meredith.35 Arnold’s
most popular work was The Light of Asia (1879), and although The Song Celestial
never matched the popularity of the earlier poem, Edwin Arnold played an
essential part in the transformation of the modern Gita. Arnold had been
principal of the Government College in Pune, before a successful journalistic
career in London with the Daily Telegraph where he rose to the position of editorin-chief. Yet his prominent public image arose from his involvement with two
grandly ambitious and acquisitive colonial projects: the journalistic assignment
of H. M. Stanley which he helped to arrange, and his promotion of a proposed
Grand Trunk railway across Africa.
The Song Celestial garnered public notices across England and Ireland, many
of which noted Arnold’s contribution in making Eastern texts accessible for a

34
35

This is noted by Girardot, “Max Muller’s ‘Sacred Books’”, 220.
“The Year 1885”, Liverpool Mercury, 31 Dec. 1885.

307

308 mishka sinha

newer, broader audience. A reviewer in the Birmingham Daily Post wrote,
In an especial sense Mr. Arnold has been a revealer to his generation. To what
extent . . . Oriental literature [has] . . . been accessible to the learned among us we do
not know; but to the mass of the English reading public they [oriental works] have been
as though they were not . . . Mr. Arnold has in mellifluous verse placed before us . . . some
of the works of utmost popularity and authority in the East . . . He now adds this noble
poem . . .36

But the demand for oriental works amongst “the mass of the . . . reading public”
was rising; as the Freeman’s Journal, published from Dublin, remarked in August
1885,
Undoubtedly Eastern Literature is being popularized, a taste for its study is rapidly
developing. In recent years, books . . . have unlocked the closed doors of Indian philosophy
and literature . . . Of the present poem, the Bhagavad Sita [sic] of the great Hindoo epic,
the Mahabharata—there are already three English translations . . . But . . . Mr. Arnold
brought to his task literary acquirements . . . supplemented by . . . special knowledge as
an Orientalist . . .37

By the end of the century the Gita, in the form of The Song Celestial, had become
a naturalized Victorian text. In December 1899, M. H. Gill and Son, a Dublin
bookseller, posted in a local paper recommendations from amongst its collection
of books especially “[s]uitable for Christmas Presents”. The Song Celestial, at
two shillings, was among the most competitively priced of those listed.38 Unlike
the reviewer of Wilkins’s Gita, who had thought the primary function of The
Bhagavat Geeta to lie in satisfying its readers’ curiosity about the exotic East,
one hundred years later a reviewer of The Song Celestial saw it as a book for
a spiritual truth-seeker, irrespective of religion or culture. Yet the poem is also
simultaneously read as a text whose pleasure lies in its value as an aesthetic object.
Both characteristics seemed to be easily reconciled within the Gita’s new identity:
The Song Celestial is not a book to be hastily read and thrown aside, and those who only
want to be amused will do much better with a three-volume novel. But to the real enquirer,
the searcher after truth, the profundity of the work will be as welcome as its rare finish
and beauty will make it to those who are chiefly interested in literary excellence.39

Yet high Victorian evangelism was still a part of late nineteenth-century
Britain. Suspicion of and even revulsion towards Hinduism existed side by side
36
37
38

39

Birmingham Daily Post, 13 Nov. 1885.
Freeman’s Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin, Ireland), 28 Aug. 1885.
“Advertisements and Notices”, Freeman’s Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin,
Ireland), Saturday, 9 Dec. 1899, classified advertisements.
Freeman’s Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin, Ireland), Saturday, 9 Dec.
1899.

corrigibility, allegory, universality

with the enthusiasm for alternative spiritual paths and the lingering Romantic
fascination with the exotic. For many who recalled the darker rumours about
contemporary Hinduism, Edwin Arnold’s task was to rescue the better portion of
Hindu philosophy from its unpleasant and even threatening context and present
it, shorn of dubious associations, to his discerning public:
Mr. Edwin Arnold[’s translation] . . . will do more for the English reader than any amount
of metaphysical or historical disquisition to open a way into the mysterious labyrinth of
Eastern speculation. The grandeur of the forest, into which he clears a smiling pathway,
conceals the confusing and noxious undergrowth where the unclean and venomous and
ferocious forces are at work . . . [the text] does not introduce any of the well-known and
popular and degrading forms of the Krishna legend . . .40

Arnold’s poem allowed the Gita to be received by a new public audience.
Within months of the appearance in print of The Song Celestial, the Leeds Public
Library had announced it as one of their latest acquisitions.41 A large part of the
new and growing readership of the nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries
was composed of borrowers of books and journals from local libraries, and it
was this audience, who would either not have had access to or simply not chosen
to read previously available translations of the Gita, which received Arnold’s
late-Victorian version with evident enthusiasm.
The text had become part of a common pool of reference, entering a kind of
generalized literary consciousness in Britain. By means of Arnold’s poem, the
Gita began to occupy a much more fluid space. It became capable of slippage,
out of a specific cultural context and meanings bounded by that context, into
a literary form, where it and its meanings could be read much more loosely, as
allegory, its images taken as metaphors, and its religious, doctrinal elements as
purely symbolic signifiers.
The Gita was no longer a “sacred” or religious text from a specific non-Western
tradition, but something more universal. In its new form it could be received as
poetry and a kind of non-denominational religious philosophy. The identifiably
late-Victorian form and language endowed it with a new kind of life which drew it
out of its older skin and contributed to its remaking as a chimerical, transcultural
object.

gandhi and the song celestial
Arnold’s poem, The Song Celestial, gave the Gita a pan-Victorian identity
which appealed not only to readers at home, but to converted readers from
across the empire. While this essay has not the scope for a history of the Gita
in the context of Indian nationalism and neo-Hinduism, there is an important
40
41

Leeds Mercury, 25 July 1885.
“Local Notes and Queries”, number CCCXL, Leeds Mercury, 18 July 1885.

309

310 mishka sinha

link between Arnold’s poem and one of the most significant representations and
uses of the Gita in India in the twentieth century—as Gandhi’s textbook of nonviolence. This needs exploring here because of its role in the dialogic nature of
the Gita’s transnational development, which comprehended Indian and Western
interpretations and their integral consciousness of each other and affected the
Gita’s modern interpretive history.
In 1925, Gandhi published an article on his interpretation of the Gita in his
nationalist weekly journal, Young India, where he described his earliest encounter
with the text. I quote it at length because it illuminates the significance of Arnold’s
influence:
My first acquaintance with the Gita was in 1889, when I was almost twenty. I had not then
much of an inkling of the principle of Ahimsa . . . Now whilst in England my contact with
two English friends made me read the Gita . . . My knowledge of Sanskrit was not enough
to enable me to understand all the verses of the Gita unaided . . . They placed before me
Sir Edwin Arnold’s magnificent rendering of the Gita. I devoured the contents from cover
to cover and was entranced by it. The last nineteen verses of the second chapter have since
been inscribed on the tablet of my heart. They contain for me all knowledge . . . I have
since read many translations and many commentaries, have argued and reasoned to my
heart’s content but the impression that first reading gave me has never been effaced . . .42

The article is set out as a response to a question which had been raised about
the true teaching of the Gita: whether it represents an injunction to violence or to
non-violence. This is a question to which it was vitally important for Gandhi to
provide a public answer, one which would effectively resolve in his own favour the
struggle between his own ideology of non-violence and that of those nationalist
leaders who sought to use the Gita to support their argument for necessary
violence. Gandhi presented his case, entering the fray with a line that echoes
one of the most popular injunctions of the Gita, to perform an action without
attachment, nis.kāma karma—“Mine is but to fight for my meaning, no matter
whether I win or lose . . .”43 —a brilliant reminder of Gandhi’s commitment to
the teaching of the Gita.
The extraordinary effectiveness of Gandhi’s argument in this essay lay in his
willingness to read the Gita as a literary work, while he argued for the imposition
of a singular interpretation (of non-violence) on a text which he presented as the
central spiritual doctrine of his creed. He made it clear that he saw the Gita as
allegory:
And who are Dhritarashtra and Yudhishtira and Arjuna? Who is Krishna? Were they all
historical characters? . . . I regard Duryodhana and his party as the baser impulses in man,

42

43

M. K. Gandhi, “The Meaning of the Gita”, Young India: A Weekly Journal VII/46 (12 Nov.
1925), 385–6.
Ibid., 385.

corrigibility, allegory, universality

and Arjuna and his party as the higher impulses. The field of battle is our body. An eternal
battle is going on between the two camps and the Poet seer has vividly described it. Krishna
is the Dweller within, ever whispering in a pure heart.44

Gandhi emphasized the Gita’s origins as a literary production by a poet, rather
than a religious revelation by a form of the Supreme Being. He argued for a critical
reading of the Gita’s epic context and declared that the Gita’s meaning must not
suffer from what formalist critics would call the “intentional fallacy”: the poem
has a semi-mystical capacity to transcend its writer’s intended meaning. “You
might . . . say that the Poet himself was not against war or violence . . . But . . . The
poet . . . is not conscious of all the interpretations his composition is capable of.
The beauty of poetry is that the creation transcends the poet”.45 While the Gita was
interpreted allegorically before the nineteenth century, from this moment, with
the influence of Arnold’s poetic representation, and, as we shall see, theosophical
renderings, allegorical interpretations of the Gita were privileged over others,
and Gandhi gave them defining currency.
In his autobiography, Gandhi wrote that the friends who introduced him to the
Gita in the form of Arnold’s poem were Theosophists.46 They introduced Gandhi
to Madame Blavatsky and Mrs Besant, and, although Gandhi “politely declined”
his friend’s invitation to join the society, he read, “at . . . [their] instance, Madame
Blavatsky’s Key to Theosophy.”47 Gandhi wrote of the book that it “stimulated
in . . . [him] the desire to read books on Hinduism”.48 Gandhi’s version of the
Gita shows evidence of his Theosophical readings as well as the influence of
Edwin Arnold.

the theosophical turn
The years between 1880 and the first decade of the twentieth century saw
the emergence and structural and ideological consolidation of the Theosophical
Society in America, India, Britain and continental Europe. Peter van der Veer
has convincingly shown that the evangelical tendencies of the Victorian age,
which were amongst the strongest influences on imperial culture and policy in
the nineteenth century, were most radically opposed not by liberalism, which he
accurately sees rather as sharing many evangelical premises, but by unorthodox

44
45
46

47

48

Ibid. 387.
Ibid., 386.
M. K. Gandhi, An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with Truth, trans. Mahadev
Desai (Ahmedabad: Navjivan Book Trust, 1930), 35.
H. P. Blavatsky, The Key to Theosophy (London: The Theosophical Publishing Company
and New York: W. Q. Judge, 1889).
Gandhi, Autobiography, 35.

311

312 mishka sinha

religious movements, including spiritualism and Theosophy.49 Many of these
movements combined religious radicalism with strong political leanings towards
various forms of nonconformist, antinomian sympathies, and anti-imperialist
rhetoric. The Gita could be integrated by Theosophy as part of what appeared to
be a radical spiritual quest which sought to achieve results well beyond merely
spiritual realms.
The Theosophical Gita was the most important chapter in the formation of the
transnational Gita—a modern, multiformed text which could be contingently
comprehended according to interpretive contexts, and universally applied to
global spiritual conditions, whilst remaining rooted to its essentialist origins in
a fabulously reconstructed purely Hindu past. The Theosophical representation
of the Gita placed it within a properly transnational context, being collectively
constructed and publicized through the text’s interpretations by both Indian and
Western members of the Theosophical Society. They included T. Subba Row, an
early Indian initiate, whose lectures on the Gita in 1886, at Adyar, conjectured that
Krishna in the Gita represented Logos, while Arjuna represented the monad, or
man; Mohini Chatterji, whose translation of the Gita was published by Trübner
in 1888; and William Quan Judge, secretary of the American section, whose
Essays on the Gita (1890) presented an entirely allegorical interpretation of the
Mahabharata.
There were two characteristics which, mutatis mutandis, tended to be present
in all of the Theosophical Gitas. These were, first, the assumption that the
Gita was primarily an allegorical text to be symbolically interpreted, and,
second, that it was a text of universal spiritual significance. These interpretive
principles were apparent in Gandhi’s reading of the Gita’s and Edwin Arnold’s
translation. They were also used in contemporary Hindu interpretations, such
as Vivekanada’s, where the universal aspect took on a double significance: the
Gita was simultaneously the universal Hindu text, the essence of Hinduism and
as such pertinent to all Hindus, and an essential spiritual text for all humanity.
However, the Theosophical adoption of these two interpretive principles gave
them a far wider reach and significance in a much broader international
context.
Annie Besant, Madame Blavatsky’s successor in Britain and India, used
her allegorical reading of the text in the service of her political commitment,
constructing an ingenious parallel between the Mahabharata war and the Indian
freedom struggle. Instead of an internecine war for succession between close kin,
the war in the Mahabharata became a struggle by Arjuna “to destroy a usurper

49

Peter van der Veer, Imperial Encounters: Religion and Modernity in India and Britain
(Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2001), 59–60.

corrigibility, allegory, universality

who was oppressing the land; it was his duty as prince, as warrior, to fight for the
deliverance of his nation and restore order and peace.”50
Besant’s interpretation, in her translation as well as her Hints on the Study of
the Gita, was the most successful and most widely read of all the Theosophical
Gitas. She used her influence to drive home the universalist assumptions which
were by now becoming characteristic of the text: “To speak of the Gita is to
speak of the history of the world . . . How great is the Song of the Lord, all
nations with one voice acclaim . . . in every country [it] has awakened some echo
in receptive hearts.”51 Theosophy’s impact was extraordinary not only because
of its geographical spread, but also because it extended across multiple fields
of influence: cultural, intellectual, aesthetic and, crucially in the case of India,
political. The Gita became a central text of Theosophy and through its intercession
the Gita could reach a transnational, transcultural audience, acquiring new,
spectacularly effective, forms and meanings in the West as well as in India.
Edwin Arnold’s translation of the Gita showed that a literary representation,
with the characters as archetypes or abstract ideals, and the action as purely
symbolic, was the most easily communicable and widely acceptable telling of
the text. Gandhi and the Theosophists followed where he had led and found
the allegorical method apt to their requirements. Through the continuing
impact of interpretations on generations of new readers and translators, these
characteristics would become part of the essential meaning of the text for
interpreters from India and the West, as the Gita gained ever-growing popularity
from the end of the nineteenth century into the twentieth.

the gita in the twentieth century
Two translations of the Gita in the twentieth century reveal the influence
of the inherited ideas and interpretations from the nineteenth century. Each
is the product of collaborations between Indian and Western translators,
and the authors of each unquestioningly accept the assumption of universal
relevance that the Gita began to acquire in the period between 1880 and 1910.
Both translations were concerned with the symbolic possibilities of the text;
however, the interpretation accompanying the second translation represents the
culmination of the process begun by the literary and allegorical interpretations of
Arnold, Gandhi and the Theosophists, by turning the ordinary, surface meaning
of the Gita on its head.
50

51

Annie Besant, The Bhagavad Gita or the Lord’s Song (Madras: G. A. Natesan and Company,
1907), iv.
Annie Besant, “First lecture”, in idem, Hints on the Study of the Bhagavad Gita (Adyar:
Theosophical Publishing House, 1973), 1–2.

313

314 mishka sinha

The two collaborative translations of the Gita which are the subjects of this
section appeared in 1936 and 1944. Each could lay claim simultaneously to the
spiritual authenticity of the East, and the cultural authority of the West, by
bringing together Indian translators—Hindu swamis visiting the West—and
prominent Western authors.
In 1931, W. B. Yeats met Purohit Swami through Thomas Sturge Moore, who
hoped to garner Yeats’s support for the swami’s book on his spiritual experiences
as an “Indian monk”. Yeats was impressed by the swami’s descriptions of his
own transcendental experiences, and agreed to write an introduction for the
book.52 Yeats now took on the task of helping the swami to publish further
books; he approached Faber and Faber, where T. S. Eliot was editor, hoping
that Eliot would publish the swami’s books and provide introductions for them,
endowing them with inestimable value in an international market. In the literary
world of modernist London, T. S. Eliot had a special status, as an interpreter of
arcane knowledge, as well as an authority, amongst Western writers and critics,
on Hindu and Buddhist philosophy. However, Eliot was not convinced about
the marketability of the swami’s books. In a letter to Purohit Swami written in
1934, Eliot wrote that he was not sure he believed all the swami’s tales of Indian
mysticism, and was even less sure of what a British audience would think of them.
About the Gita, he added,
to the ordinary occidental reader who has no first hand experience of Indian thought, and
no real perception of the seriousness of the subject, the Bhagavad-Geeta is likely to seem
at first sight repetitious and prolix. I believe that it might seem so to me, if I had not many
years ago read it in the original.53

Despite Eliot’s reservations, Faber took on the publication of four books by
Purohit Swami, apparently on the condition that they be either introduced by or
in some way associated with the name of W. B. Yeats.54 Apart from an anonymous
review of Yeats and Purohit Swami’s translation of The Ten Principal Upanis.ads,
in a Faber catalogue for 1937, Eliot did not provide a written endorsement of
any of the swami’s books.55 He did not write an introduction to Purohit Swami’s
translation The Geeta, despite there being evidence that one was expected from
him by the Faber directors.56
52
53

54

55
56

Purohit Swami, An Indian Monk (London: Macmillan, 1932).
T. S. Eliot File, Purohit Swami Collection, Nehru Memorial Archives, Delhi (unpublished
letter from T. S. Eliot to Purohit Swami, 1 Nov. 1934).
T. S. Eliot File, Purohit Swami Collection, Nehru Memorial Archives, Delhi (unpublished
letter from T.S. Eliot to Purohit Swami, 7 May 1937).
The Ten Principal Upanishads, trans. Purohit Swami and W. B. Yeats (London: Faber, 1937).
The Geeta: The Gospel of the Lord Shri Krishna, trans. from the original Sanskrit by Shri
Purohit, Swami (London: Faber, 1935).

corrigibility, allegory, universality

Eliot and Yeats exemplified in turn two kinds of response to the Gita in the
West—the scholarly, which had been more prominent for most of the nineteenth
century, and the popular, which rose to dominate the field from the 1880s.
Yeats devoted much of the energies of his last years to the publication and
promotion of Purohit Swami’s work. Introduced to Hinduism by an Indian
Theosophist in 1886, Yeats was later a member of the Theosophical Society for a
number of years. From an early age, Yeats had sought initiation into a spiritual
path which would lead him to revelations of arcane mysteries and mystical
truths which he believed to exist on a hidden plane, a spiritus mundi, which
was everywhere and yet not apparent. His interests in Theosophy, spiritualism
and Purohit Swami’s books were all motivated by this search. He was far less
concerned with the scholarly accuracy of the swami’s translations than with
the spiritual truths they seemed to embody, an attitude which characterized
the popular tradition of interest in Hinduism and its texts, with its fluid and
amorphous synthesis of influences and ideas.
On the other hand, Eliot inherited his approach to Indian philosophy and
its texts from his teachers at Harvard, who treated them as scholarly sources,
to be understood within a specific cultural and religious context. Despite poetic
references to the Gita in the Four Quartets and in an unpublished section of
The Waste Land, as well as a statement that he believed the Gita to be the next
greatest philosophical poem after Dante’s Divine Comedy, Eliot did not want to
be involved in the production of a popular translation of the text. Unlike Yeats, he
was not convinced that the Gita’s proselytization in the West as a generalized or
universal spiritual doctrine was either desirable or possible. While Yeats accepted
the late nineteenth-century idea of the Gita as a universal text which was full
of symbolic significance, an aspect which appealed to Yeats’s occult proclivities,
Eliot remained unconvinced by the idea of a universal religion. Amongst most
twentieth-century western readers of the Gita, Eliot was increasingly in the
minority.
In 1944 the Gita appeared in a translation by Swami Prabhavananda and
Christopher Isherwood.57 Like Purohit Swami, Prabhavananda had travelled
west to proselytize Hinduism. It was a tradition which may have had its earliest
success in Swami Vivekananda, but its most influential and effective representative
came later in the person of A. C. Bhaktivedanta and his International Society
for Krishna Consciousness. Prabhavananda gathered a circle of influential
acolytes around him in California. One of these was the English novelist,
Aldous Huxley, who introduced Christopher Isherwood to the swami. Isherwood
and Prabhavananda’s translation of the Gita was one of several collaborations
57

The Song of God: Bhagavadgita, trans. by Swami Prabhavananda and Christopher
Isherwood, with an Introduction by Aldous Huxley (Hollywood: M. Rodd Co., 1944).

315

316 mishka sinha

undertaken by the swami with various Western writers. Yet The Song of God had
a special advantage. As well as being co-authored by a famous author, it carried
an introduction by the even more celebrated Aldous Huxley.
Huxley’s Introduction to The Song of God became as famous as the book for
which it was written. In it, he expounded the principles of a universalist spiritual
tradition he called the “perennial philosophy”, of which he claimed the Gita to be
an exemplar text:58 “In Vedanta and Hebrew prophecy, in the Tao Teh King [sic]
and the Platonic dialogues . . . the Perennial Philosophy has spoken almost all the
languages of Asia and Europe and made use of the terminology and traditions of
every one of the higher religions”.59
The universality of the Gita was re-emphasized through its representation as
part of the “perennial philosophy.” It was the “compendium of the whole Vedic
doctrine . . . the focus of all Indian religion”,60 but contained “enduring value”,
“not only for Indians, but for all mankind”.61
Through its inclusion in this new paradigm, the Gita could now function
paradoxically both as a central symbol of neo-Hinduism, and as an exemplar text
of a transnational universalist philosophy and spirituality.
Aldous Huxley’s Introduction brought to light the distance travelled by
the Gita from its original literary and spiritual context, and illustrated the
breadth of possible meanings which could be assigned to it, and the Gita’s
amenability to allegorical interpretation was taken by Huxley to its utmost limit:
“The Bhagavad-Gita is perhaps the most systematic scriptural statement of the
Perennial Philosophy . . . [for] a world at war . . . it stands pointing, clearly and
unmistakably, to the only road of escape from the self-imposed necessity of selfdestruction.”62 Writing in the midst of a war of destruction and violence on an
unprecedented scale, Huxley reread and reimagined the Gita in a role which not
only subverted its prime injunction to kill, and accept the necessity of killing, but
converted it into a pacifist manifesto, a means of escape from violence.

conclusion
Telang’s Bhagavadgita, published in Max Müller’s Sacred Books, Edwin
Arnold’s The Song Celestial, the loosely connected Theosophical interpretations
with their family resemblances, and Gandhi’s Gita, which drew from Arnold

58

59
60
61
62

The next year, Huxley published The Perennial Philosophy (London: Chatto and Windus,
1945), devoted to explicating its history and underlying principles.
Aldous Huxley, “Introduction”, Song of God, 11–12.
Ibid., p. 13. Huxley quotes Ananda Coomaraswamy on the Gita.
Ibid. This is Huxley’s own conclusion.
Ibid., 23.

corrigibility, allegory, universality

and the Theosophists, all these, published between 1880 and 1910, individually
and in succession contrived a hegemonic form for a transnational Gita. Each
contingently contributed to an interpretation which emphasized its allegorical
qualities and symbolic significance and its universal relevance. As the final section
has shown, the majority of translations that followed were to assume these
qualities to be intrinsic as well as essential to the text. In some sense the horizon
forming the historical consciousness of these previous translations has been
blurred into the horizon of the text itself within the consciousness of modern
readers and interpreters of the Gita.

317

