HOLY GEETA
By

Swami Chinmayananda

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

General introduction
To
Bhagawad Geeta
IF THE Upanishads are the text-books of philosophical
principles discussing man, world and God, the Geeta is a
hand-book of instructions as to how every human being
can come to live the subtle philosophical principles of
Vedanta in the actual work-a-day world.
Srimad Bhagawad Geeta, the Divine Song of the Lord,
occurs in the Bhishma Parva of the Mahabharata, and
comprises eighteen chapters, from the 25th to the 42nd.
This great hand-book of practical living marked a positive
revolution in Hinduism and inaugurated a Hindu
renaissance for the ages that followed the Puranic Era.
In the Song of the Lord, the Geeta, the Poet-Seer Vyasa has
brought the Vedic truths from the sequestered Himalayan
caves into the active fields of political life and into the
confusing tensions of an imminent fratricidal war. Under
the stress of some psychological maladjustments, Arjuna
got shattered in his mental equipoise and lost his capacity
to act with true discrimination. Lord Krishna takes in
hand that neurotic mind of Arjuna for a Hindu treatment
with Vedic truths.
2

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Religion is philosophy in action. From time to time an
ancient philosophy needs intelligent re-interpretation in
the context of new times, and men of wisdom, prophets,
and seers guide the common man on how to apply
effectively the ancient laws in his present life.
If we try to digest properly the implications of the Geeta's
advice in the light of Vedic lore, it becomes amply clear
how actions performed without ego-centric desires purge
the mind of its deep-seated impressions and make it
increasingly subtle in its purification and preparation for
greater flights into the Infinite Beyond. To explain this, we
will just try to review a little the conception of the mind
and its functions in our day-to- day life.
Mind is man. As the mind, so is the individual. If the mind
is disturbed, the individual is disturbed. If the mind is
good, the individual is good. This mind, for purposes of
our study and understanding, may be considered as
constituted of two distinct sides--one facing the world of
stimuli that reach it from the objects of the world, and the
other facing the "within" which reacts to the stimuli
received. The outer mind facing the object is called the
objective mind--in Sanskrit we call it the Manas--and the
inner mind is called the subjective mind--in Sanskrit, the
Buddhi.
That individual is whole and healthy in whom the
objective and subjective aspects of the mind work in
unison with each other, and in moments of doubt, the
3

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OBJECTIVE MIND readily comes under the disciplining
influence of the SUBJECTIVE MIND. But unfortunately,
except for a rare few, the majority of us have minds that
are split. This split between the SUBJECTIVE and the
OBJECTIVE aspects of our mind is mainly created by the
layer of egoistic desires in the individual. The greater the
distance between these two phases of the mind, the
greater the inner confusion in the individual, and the
greater the egoism and low desires which the individual
comes to exhibit in life.
Through the five "gateways of knowledge," the organs of
perception, all of us experience the world of objects
around us at all moments of our waking state. The
innumerable stimuli that react with our sense organs
(receptors), create impulses which reach the OBJECTIVE
mind and these impulses filter deep down to the
subjective stratum through the intervening layers of
individual ego-centric desires. These impulses, thus
reaching the SUBJECTIVE mind of a person, react with the
existing impressions of his own past actions that are
carefully stored away in the subjective layer and express
themselves in the world outside through the five organs of
action (effectors).

4

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Diagram "A" gives figuratively the design of each
activity that man performs in the world outside when he
consciously comes to react with a given set of stimuli.
At each moment, man meets with different patterns of
these stimuli, and thus constantly gathers new
impressions in the 'subjective-mind.' Every set of impulses
reaching it not only adds to the existing layers of
impressions already in it, but also gets coloured by the
quality of these Vasanas hoarded within. When they are
translated into action, the actions carry a flavour of the
existing Vasanas in the 'subjective-mind.'
All of us live constantly meeting a variety of experiences;
and at each incident, we perceive, react with the
perceived, and come to act in the outer field. In this
5

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

process, we unwittingly come to hoard in ourselves more
and more dirt of new impressions. The 'subjective-mind'
gets increasingly granulated by the overlapping
signatures of our own past moments. These granulations
make the 'subjective-mind' dull and opaque, and form, as
it were, an impregnable wall between ourselves and the
spiritual Divinity that shines eternally as pure
Consciousness in all of us deep within the core of our
personality.
The theory of Vedanta repeats that reduction of the
Vasanas is the means of volatalising the mind. When I
look into a mirror and do not see my face in it, it is not
because the mirror is not reflecting the object in front of it,
but because the reflected image is not perceptible to my
vision due to, perhaps, the thick layer of dust on the
mirror. With a duster, when I clean the mirror, the act of
cleaning does not CREATE the reflection of the face, but it
only unveils the reflection which was already there.
Similarly, man is not aware today of his divine spiritual
nature because the 'subjective- mind' reflecting it is thickly
coated with dull Vasanas gathered by it during its egocentric, passionate existence in the world.
To bring the subjective and the objective aspects of the
mind together into a happy marriage where the 'objectivemind' is well-disciplined to act faithfully as per the
guidance of the 'subjective,' is the Yoga pointed out in the
Geeta. This is accomplished only by the removal of the
dividing factor--the ego-centric desires. The typical word
6

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

used in the Geeta to indicate this practical implication of
Yoga is self-explanatory--Buddhi Yoga.

As
rep
res
ent
ed
in
Di
agr
am
"B"
,
wh
en
this happy marriage between the subjective and the
objective aspects of the mind has taken place, thereafter
that equanimous Yogin becomes skilled in action("Yoga
Karmasu Kousalam"-- "Dexterity in actions of Yoga"-II,50), and he, with his objective-mind,' reacts intelligently
and faithfully to the external stimuli; his actions become,
as it were, a purgation of the already existing Vasanas in
his 'subjective-mind.' Thus, through intelligent action, an
individual can exhaust his existing impressions and
ultimately redeem his 'subjective-mind' from the
granulations and make it more clear and crystalline.
7

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This idea has been emphasised by great commentators
like Sankara, who tirelessly repeat that selfless activity,
performed in a spirit of egoless adoration and reverence to
the divine ideal, would ultimately result in inner
purification. This, according to Sankara, is the most
unavoidable pre-requisite before the subjective mind can
turn inward seeking to rediscover the sanctuary of the
Self, the Spiritual Reality.
Spiritually viewed, the 'subjective-mind' is thus a secret
weapon in man to be used as an OUTLET for the existing
impressions that have come to be stored up in it. But the
tragedy is that the average man, in his ignorance, misuses
this dangerous weapon and brings about his own
annihilation. He uses it as an INLET and creates, during
his selfish activities performed with low motives, a new
stock of mental impressions.
In order to exhaust them, nature provides new
equipments (bodies), in which the same ego comes to live,
repeatedly, life after life. The message of the Geeta clearly
points out that actions are not to be avoided and the world
of objects is not to be denied. On the contrary, by making
use of them intelligently, we must strive selflessly, and
force the very Samsara to provide us with a field for
exhausting our mental dirt.
An unhealthy mind divided in itself, as we explained
earlier, becomes an easy prey to a host of psychological
diseases. Weakened in its constitution, it easily becomes a
8

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

victim to all contagions. Arjuna was an average educated
man, and from the details of the Mahabharata, we know
the environments in which he grew up. But for the entire
Mahabharata, we would not appreciate so fully Arjuna's
mental condition, without which Krishna's message
would have fallen flat upon the readers. Therefore, the
Geeta is an intrinsic part of the entire Mahabharata and
the classic would have been a hotch-potch story, without
pith and dignity, if Srimad Bhagawad Geeta was not in it-and the Geeta would have been a mere philosopher's
riddle-poem without the Mahabharata background. The
story and the poem together are an organic whole; each
devoid of the other would be ineffectual and empty.
Modern psychology exhausts volumes in describing to us
the dreary results of suppression and repression of
emotions. There are many moments in our lives when we
KNOWINGLY suppress many of our emotions; but more
often in our day-to-day life, we, UNCONSCIOUSLY,
repress many of our sentiments. Repressed emotions
accumulate a tremendous amount of dynamic energy
which must necessarily seek a field for expression, and
unless they are properly guided they would boomerang
back to destroy the very individual. Though there are no
direct explanations of any repressions of emotion in
Arjuna, a careful student of the story can easily diagnose
that the great hero on the battle-field came under the
influence of his repressed conditions and behaved as a
victim of perfect neurosis.
9

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The causes for his emotional repressions are not far to
seek. A great hero, confident of his own strength, was
made to live amidst the unjust tyranny of his
Machiavellian cousins. At the same time the great archer
could not give vent to his nature because of the righteous
policy of "Peace at all costs" of his eldest brother,
Yudhishthira. These repressed emotions found a healthy
field for expression in the severe Tapas which he
performed during his life in the jungles.
During the last year of their lives INCOGNITO, the
Pandava family had to serve as menials in the palace of
the Raja of Virata. The carping injustice and the cruel
indignities of the situation caused, no doubt, a lot of
repression in Arjuna's mind. But even these found a
healthy field of expression in the battle that he had to
wage against Duryodhana's forces that came to challenge
the Virata-might.
After their long and strenuous trials, when the Pandavas
at last reached their native kingdom, their tyrant cousin,
with no rhyme or reason, denied them not only their right
to half the kingdom, but also all terms of conciliation.
The shrewd, blind Dhritarashtra, father of the Kauravas,
probably understood the psychological condition of the
great warrior, Arjuna, and on the day previous to the
great war, he sent Sanjaya, his emissary, to Arjuna with a
secret message. This message, full of mischievous import,
sowed the seeds of dangerous ideas in the mind of Arjuna,
10

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

directing his energies caused by the repressions of his
emotions into wrong channels, so that he became a
hapless neurotic in the face of the great challenge. We
shall read in the First Chapter the very same arguments
and ideas repeated by Arjuna faithfully from the message
he had the previous day from his uncle.
On that fateful day when both the armies were getting
into formation, Arjuna asks his charioteer, Lord Krishna,
to drive the chariot to a point between the two forces, so
that he may review the enemy lines. Larger in number,
better equipped, more liberal in supplies and commanded
by well- known personalities, the Kaurava formation,
expanding itself like an "eagle," stood poised to swoop
down upon the smaller army of the Pandavas. This was a
sight severely challenging the mental stamina of the
Pandava hero. His 'objective-mind,' under the impact of
the stimuli, could not find any reaction from its
'subjective-mind (Buddhi), because the shattering of these
two aspects was complete due to the intervening layers of
his egocentric assumptions and desire-prompted
anxieties. The dynamic forces released in his mind due to
the repressions were not properly channelised, but were
mis-directed by the suggestions of Dhritarashtra's words,
and therefore, the greatest hero of the times, Arjuna,
suddenly became a despondent, bewildered, neurotic
patient.
The 'Krishna-treatment' of this patient of psychological
derangement was certainly a specific cure, inasmuch as, in
11

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the last chapter we definitely hear Arjuna declaring that
all his "delusions have ended." The rest of the story of
how, having come into his own, he became a rejuvenated
warrior of tremendous strength and valour, is quite wellknown to all students of this great classic.
In varying degrees, every man is a victim of this 'ArjunaDisease' and the 'Krishna-cure,' being specific, is available
to all of us at all times in the philosophy of the Geeta.
In the Second Chapter, which is almost a summary of the
entire Geeta, Krishna indicates the two main lines of
treatment. One is a "treatment of idealism" wherein
Arjuna is directed to a greater reality than his mind, ego
and intellect, and thereby the divorce between the
'subjective' and the 'objective' aspects of his mind is
eliminated to some extent. In the second half of the same
chapter, we shall read and come to understand how
selfless activity will purge the existing Vasanas in the
individual. Arjuna being a Kshatriya, his mind was
coloured by the impression of Rajo-guna (activity), and so
he needed a battle-field to exhaust those impressions.
Thus, we find Krishna repeatedly goading his friend with
the words, "Get up and fight." This need not necessarily
mean that the Geeta is a war- mongering scripture of the
ruling-class. It is a call to each one of us to get up and fight
the battle of our own life, according to our own Vasanas
(Swadharma), so that we may exhaust them and thus gain
inner purity. As we take it up stanza by stanza for a close
12

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

study of the entire Song, we shall try to see how Krishna
indicates the same truth from different angles of vision
and explains it in different words.

Chapter 1
Arjuna Vishada Yoga
The Yoga of Despondency of Arjuna
Dhritarashtra said: 1. What did the sons of Pandu and also my
people do when, desirous to fight, they assembled together on the
holy plain of Kurukshetra, O Sanjaya?
In the entire Geeta this is the only verse which the blind
old king Dhritarashtra gives out. All the rest of the seven
hundred stanzas are Sanjaya's report on what happened
on the Kurukshetra battle-field, just before the war.
The blind old king is certainly conscious of the palpable
injustices that he had done to his nephews, the Pandavas.
Dhritarashtra knew the relative strength of the two
armies, and therefore, was fully confident of the larger
strength of his son's army. And yet, the viciousness of his
past and the consciousness of the crimes perpetrated seem
to be weighing heavily upon the heart of the blind king,
and so he has his own doubts on the outcome of this war.
13

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

He asks Sanjaya to explain to him what is happening on
the battle-field of Kurukshetra. Vyasa had given Sanjaya
the powers to see and listen to the happenings in far-off
Kurukshetra even while he was sitting beside
Dhritarashtra in the palace at Hastinapura.
Sanjaya said: 2. Having seen the army of the Pandavas drawn
up in battle array, King Duryodhana then approached his
teacher (Drona) and spoke these words.
From this stanza onwards, we have the report of Sanjaya
upon what he saw and heard on the war-front at
Kurukshetra. When Duryodhana saw the Pandava-forces
arrayed for battle, though they were less in number than
his own forces, yet the tyrant felt his self-confidence
draining away. As a child would run to its parents in
fright, so too Duryodhana, unsettled in his mind, runs to
his teacher, Dronacharya. When our motives are impure
and our cause unjust, however well-equipped we may be,
our minds should necessarily feel restless and agitated.
This is the mental condition of all tyrants and lusty
dictators.
3. Behold, O Teacher! this mighty army of the sons of Pandu,
arrayed by the son of Drupada, thy wise disciple.
It is indeed stupid of Duryodhana to point out to Drona
the army formation of the Pandavas. Later on also we
14

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

shall find Duryodhana talking too much and that is a
perfect symptom indicating the inward fears of the great
king over the final outcome of the unjust war.
4. Here are heroes, mighty archers, equal in battle to Bhima and
Arjuna, Yuyudhana, Virata and Drupada, each commanding
eleven-thousand archers.
5. Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, and the valiant king of Kashi,
Purujit and Kuntibhoja and Saibya, the best of men.
6. The strong Yudhamanyu and the brave Uttamaujas, the son
of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi, all of them, divisional
commanders.
In these three stanzas, we have a list of names of all those
who were noted personalities in the Pandava army.
Duryodhana, reviewing his enemies standing in
formation, recognises very many noted men of war
functioning as maharathas in the Pandava forces. A
maharathi was in charge of a group of 11, 000 archers,
which formed a division in the ancient Hindu army.
Arjuna and Bhima were accepted men of war, noted for
archery and strength. These enumerated heroes were, says
Duryodhana, each as great as Arjuna and Bhima, the
implication being that though the Pandava forces were
less in number, their total effectiveness was much greater
than that of the larger and better equipped army of the
Kauravas.
15

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

7. Know also, O best among the twice-born, the names of those
who are the most distinguished amongst ourselves, the leaders of
my army; these I name to thee for thy information.
Addressing his master as "the best among the twice-born,"
Duryodhana now repeats the names of the distinguished
heroes in his own army. A weak man, to escape from his
own mental fears, will whistle to himself in the dark. The
guilty conscience of the tyrant king had undermined all
his mental strength. The more he realised the combined
strength of the great personalities arrayed in the opposite
enemy camp, the more abjectly nervous he felt, in spite of
the fact that his own army was also manned by highly
competent heroes. In order to revive himself, he wanted to
hear words of encouragement from his teachers and
elders. But when Duryodhana met Drona, the acharya
chose to remain silent and the helpless king had to find for
himself new means of encourgement to revive his own
drooping enthusiasm. Therefore, he started enumerating
the great leaders in his own army.
When a person has thus completely lost his morale due to
the heavy burden of his own crimes weighing on his
conscience, it is but natural that he loses all sense of
proportion in his words. At such moments of high tension
an individual clearly exhibits his true mental culture. He
addresses his own teacher as "the best among the twiceborn."

16

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

A Brahmana is considered as "twice-born" because of his
inner spiritual development. When born from his mother's
womb man comes into the world only as the animal called
man. Thereafter, through study and contemplation he
gains more and more discipline, and a cultured Hindu is
called a Brahmana (Brahmin).
After all, Drona is a Brahmana by birth and as such he
must have a greater share of softness of heart. Moreover,
the enemy lines are fully manned by his own dear
students. As a shrewd dictator, Duryodhana entertained
shameless doubts about the loyalty of his own teacher.
This is but an instinctive fear which is natural with all men
of foul motives and crooked dealings. When we are not
ourselves pure, we will project our own weaknesses and
impurities on others who are working around us as our
subordinates.
8. Yourself and Bishma, and Karna and also Kripa, the
victorious in war; Aswatthama, Vikarna and so also the son of
Somadatta.
Though Duryodhana, in his mental hysteria, got slightly
upset at the subjective onslaught of his own brutal
motives and past crimes, like the true dictator that he was,
he regained his balance in no time. The moment he had
spilt out in his insulting arrogance, the term "twice-born"
in addressing his teacher, he realised that he had over17

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

stepped the bounds of discretion. Perhaps the cold silence
of the revered acharya spoke amply to Duryodhana.
9. And many other heroes also who are determined to give up
their lives for my sake, armed with various weapons and
missiles, all well-skilled in battle.
The incorrigible vanity of the dictatorial tyrant is amply
clear when he arrogates to himself the stupendous honour
that such a vast array of heroes had come ready to lay
down their lives for "MY SAKE." To all careful students of
the Mahabharata, it cannot be very difficult to estimate how
many of these great veterans would have thrown in their
lot with Duryodhana, had it not been for the fact that
Bhishma --- the grandsire --- was fighting in the ranks of
the Kauravas.
10. This army of ours defended by Bhishma is insufficient,
whereas that army of theirs defended by Bhima is sufficient. Or,
This army of ours protected by Bhishma is unlimited, whereas
that army of theirs protected by Bhima is limited.
In the art of warfare, then known among the ancient
Hindus, each army had, no doubt, a commander-in-chief,
but it also had a powerful man of valour, courage and
intelligence, who functioned as the "defender." In the
Kaurava forces, Bhishma officiated as the "defender," and
in the Pandava forces Bhima held the office.
18

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

11. Therefore do you all, stationed in your respective positions
in the several divisions of the army, protect Bhishma alone.
After thus expressing in a soliloquy, his own estimate of
the relative strength and merit of the two forces, now
arrayed, ready for a total war, the king in Duryodhana
rises above his mental clouds of desperation to shoot forth
his imperial orders to his army officers. He advises them
that each commander must keep to his position and fight
in disciplined order, and all of them should spare no pains
to see that the revered Bhishma is well-protected. Perhaps,
Duryodhana suspects that the lusty force that he had
mobilised is an ill-assorted heterogeneous army
constituted of the various tribal chieftains and kings of
distant lands and that the strength of such an army could
be assured, only when they hold on to a united strategy in
all their various manoeuvres. Synchronisation of the
different operations is the very backbone of an army's
success, and in order to bring this about, as a true
strategist, Duryodhana is instructing his various
commanders working in their different wings to work out
the single policy of protecting Bhishma.
12. His glorious grandsire (Bhishma) , the oldest of the
Kauravas, in order to cheer Duryodhana, now sounded aloud a
lion's roar and blew his conch.

19

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

All the while that Duryodhana was busy making a fool of
himself and in his excitement putting all the great officers
of his army into an uncomfortable mood of desperate
unhappiness, Bhishma was standing, not too far away,
observing the pitiable confusions of the tyrant. The
revered grandsire noticed, intelligently, in Dronacharya's
silence, the outraged temper of a man of knowledge and
action. He realised that the situation could be saved only if
all those assembled were jerked out of their mental
preoccupations. The more they were let alone with their
revolting thoughts against Duryodhana, the more they
would become ineffectual for the imminent battle.
Understanding this psychology of the officers under his
command, the great Marshall Bhishma took up his warbugle (conch) and blew it, sending forth roaring waves of
confidence into the hearts of the people manning the
array.
This action of Bhishma, though performed by him out of
pity for Duryodhana's mental condition; amounted to an
act of aggression almost corresponding to the 'first-bulletshot' in modern warfare. With this lion-roar, the
Mahabharata war was actually started, and for all historical
purposes the Kauravas had thereby become the
aggressors.
13. Then (following Bhishma) , conches and kettle-drums,
tabors, drums and cow-horns blared forth quite suddenly and
the sound was tremendous.
20

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

All the commanders were no doubt in high tension, and as
soon as they heard the marshall's bugle, individually, each
one of them took up his instrument and sounded the
battle-cry. Thus, conches and kettle-drums, tabors and
trumpets, bugles and cow-horns, all burst forth into a
challenging war-call, which Sanjaya, half-heartedly,
describes as "tremendous." Later on, we shall find that
when this challenge was replied to by the Pandavas, the
sound was described by Sanjaya as "terrific," "resounding
throughout heaven and earth, and rending the hearts of
the Kauravas." Here is another instance to prove that
Sanjaya was, evidently, a moral objector to the war-aim of
Duryodhana. Therefore, we have in him a most
sympathetic reporter of the message of the Lord at the
battle-front, as given out in His Song Divine.
14. Then, also Madhava and the son of Pandu, seated in their
magnificent chariot yoked with white horses, blew their divine
conches.
The wealth of detail that has been so lavishly squandered
in expressing a simple fact that, from the Pandava-side,
Krishna and Arjuna answered the battle-cry, clearly shows
where Sanjaya's sympathies lay. Here, the description --"sitting in the magnificent chariot, harnessed with white
horses, Madhava and Arjuna blew their conches divine" -- clearly echoes the hope lurking in the heart of Sanjaya
that due to the apparent contrast in the two descriptions,
21

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

perhaps, even at this moment Dhritarashtra may be
persuaded to withdraw his sons from the warfront.
15. Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya and Dhananjaya
(Arjuna) blew the Devadatta and Vrikodara (Bhima) , the doer
of terrible deeds, blew the great conch, named Paundra.
In his description of the Pandava array, Sanjaya is very
particular to mention even the name of each warrior's
special conch. Panchajanya was blown by Krishna.
Hrishikesha is the name of the Lord and it has often been
described as meaning the 'Lord of the Senses.' But this is
according to an old derivation: Hrishika+ Isha = "Lord of
the Senses." But the word "Hrishika" is an obscure one.
Modern commentators prefer to explain it as Hrish+ kesha
"Having short hair."
16. King Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew the Anantavijaya;
Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosha and the
Manipushpaka.
17. The king of Kashi, an excellent archer, Shikhandi, the
mighty commander of eleven thousand archers, Dhristadyumna
and Virata and Satyaki, the unconquered;

22

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

18. Drupada and the sons of Draupadi, O Lord of the Earth, and
the son of Subhadra, the mighty armed, blew their respective
conches.
In the above verses we have the enumeration of the great
Maharathas, battalion-commanders, who, with enthusiasm,
loudly blew their conches, again and again, in an
ascending cadence. The arrow that ultimately felled
Bhishma in the Mahabharata-war came from Shikhandi. The
charioteer of Krishna, who was also a battalioncommander in the Pandava army, was called Satyaki.
The report is being addressed to Dhritarashtra and it is
indicated by Sanjaya's words, "Oh Lord of the earth."
19. That tumultuous sound rent the hearts of (the people of)
Dhritarashtra's party and made both heaven and earth
reverberate.
From the fourteenth stanza onwards Sanjaya gives us in
all detail an exhaustive description of the Pandava forces,
and he spares no pains to bring into the mind of
Dhritarashtra a vivid understanding of the superiority of
the Pandava forces. Perhaps, the minister hopes that his
blind king will realise the disastrous end and, at least
now, will send forth a command to stop the fratricidal
war.

23

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

20-21. Then, seeing the people of Dhritarashtra's party standing
arrayed and the discharge of weapons about to begin, Arjuna,
the son of Pandu, whose ensign was a monkey, took up his bow
and said these words to Krishna (Hrishikesha) , O Lord of the
Earth!
In these one and a half verses we have a description of the
arrival of the hero of the Mahabharata war, Arjuna, on the
battle-field. The exact time and nature of his entry are
noted here. The shooting had not yet started, but it was
imminent. It was the most tense moment; the crisis had
risen to its highest pitch. It was at this moment that
Arjuna, whose ensign was that of Hanuman, said the
following words to Lord Krishna.
In those ancient days of chivalrous warfare, each
honoured hero had his own personal flag, carrying on it
conspicuously, a well-recognised symbol. By the flag
flying on the chariot, the enemy could recognise who was
the occupant of the chariot. A hero was not generally short
at by an ordinary soldier, but each fought with his equal
on the battle-field. This system of carrying a symbol to
recognize individuals in the battle-field is faithfully
followed even in modern warfare. A high official's vehicle
carries insignia of the officer's rank on its very numberplate; on the very uniform enough details are pinned on to
recognize the wearer and identify him. Arjuna's ensign
was that of a monkey.

24

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The stanza also gives us, in hasty strokes, the information
that Arjuna was impatient to start the righteous war. He
had raised his instrument of war, his bow, indicating his
readiness to fight.
Arjuna said: 21-22. In the midst of the two armies, place my
chariot, O Achyuta, that I may behold those who stand here
desirous of fighting and, on the eve of this battle, let me know
with whom I must fight.
Here, we hear Arjuna's soldier-like command to his
charioteer to drive and place the vehicle between the two
armies so that he might see and recognise the various
heroes whom he has to meet and fight in the great war. In
expressing thus a wish to review the enemy lines the great
hero is showing his daring and chivalry, his great courage
and firm determination, his adventurous readiness and
indomitable energy. Upto this point in the story, Arjuna,
the invincible hero of the Mahabharata, was in his own true
element unaffected by any mental hysteria.
23. For I desire to observe those who are assembled here for the
fight, wishing to please in battle, the evil-minded sons of
Dhritarashtra.
The verse only reinforces our impression of Arjuna
gathered in the previous lines. He is giving the reason
why he wants to review the enemy lines. As a man of
action, he did not want to take any undue risk and so
wanted to see for himself who were the low-minded,
25

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

power-mad, greed-ridden men who had joined the forces
of the Kauravas, supporting the palpably tyrannical and
evidently unjust cause of the unscrupulous Duryodhana.
As we read the stanza, we can almost hear the great
warrior's teeth grinding, as he spits out these hot words
which express his mental estimate of his relentless
cousins.
Sanjaya said: 24. Thus addressed by Gudakesha, O Bharata,
Hrishikesha, having stationed the best of chariots between the
two armies;
25. In front of Bhishma and Drona, and all the rulers of the
earth, he said, 'O Partha, behold these Kurus gathered together.
'
At a point "facing Bhishma, Drona and all the rulers of the
earth," the Divine Charioteer pulled up the reins and
brought the royal chariot to a halt. As a dutiful driver,
Krishna says to Arjuna, "Behold, O Partha! All the
Kauravas gathered together." These are the only words
that Krishna has spoken in the entire first chapter; and
these represent the sparks that set fire to and brought
down the egoistic edifice of false valuations which the
great hero had built for himself as a splendid dwelling
place for his personality. Hereafter, we shall find how
Arjuna reacted to this great challenge and ultimately got
his entire "within" wrecked and shattered.
26

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Partha means 'Son of Pritha' --- it is a name of Arjuna;
'Pritha' was another name of Kunti; the Sanskrit term
Partha also carries a flavour of the term Parthiva meaning
'clay-made,' 'earth-formed.' The suggestive implication of
this term is very striking inasmuch as it connotes that the
Geeta is the Song of Truth sung by the Immortal to the
mortal Arjuna, man's all-time representative.
26. Then Partha saw stationed there in both the armies, fathers,
grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons,
grandsons and friends too.
27. (He saw) Fathers-in-law and friends also in both the armies.
Then the son of Kunti, seeing all these kinsmen thus standing
arrayed, spoke thus sorrowfully, filled with deep pity.
Thus shown by Shri Krishna, Arjuna recognised in his
enemy lines all his kith and kin, near and dear family
members, brothers and cousins, teachers and grandsires,
and almost all his acquaintances and friends. He
recognized such intimate relations not only in the enemy
lines, but even in his own army. This sight, perhaps,
brought to his mind, for the first time, the full realisation
of the tragedies of a fratricidal war. As a warrior and a
man of action, he did not, perhaps till then, fully realize
the extent of sacrifice that society would be called upon to
make in order that his ambition might be fulfilled and
Duryodhana's cruelties avenged.
27

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Whatever might have been the cause, the sight brought
into his mind a flood of pity and compassion.
Evidently, this was not an honest emotion. Had it been
honest, had his pity and compassion been, Buddha-like,
natural and instinctive, he would have, even long before
the war, behaved quite differently. This emotion which
now Sanjaya glorifies as "pity" in Arjuna, is a misnomer.
In the human heart, there is always a great tendency to
glorify one's own weaknesses with some convenient
angelic name and divine pose. Thus, a rich man's vanity is
misnamed as charity when he builds a temple in his own
name with the secret aim of immortalising himself. Here
also we find that the feeling of desperation that came in
Arjuna's mind due to the complete shattering of his
mental equilibrium has been misnamed and glorified as
'pity'.
Arjuna had a long life of mental repressions which had
created an infinite amount of dynamic energies seeking a
field for expression. His mind got split up because of his
egoistic evaluation of himself as the greatest hero of his
time, and because of his anxious desire for a victorious
end of the war. The preoccupation of his mind, dreaming
intensively, about the ultimate end of the war brought
about a complete divorce between the 'subjective' and the
'objective' aspects of his mind.
Later on, in this chapter, we shall discover the various
symptoms of this neurotic condition in him and his
28

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

hysterical blabberings which are typical of such a mental
patient. The endeavour in Chapter I of the Geeta is to give
the complete "case-history" of a patient suffering from the
typical "Arjuna-disease." The Bhagawad Geeta gives, as I
said earlier, an extremely efficient "Krishna-cure" for this
soul-killing "Arjuna-disease."
Arjuna said: 28. Seeing these my kinsmen, O Krishna, arrayed,
eager to fight,
29. My limbs fail and my mouth is parched, my body quivers
and my hair stands on end.
In these two stanzas, there is an exhaustive enumeration
of the symptoms that the patient could then recognise in
his own physical body as a result of his mental confusions.
That which Sanjaya had glorified as 'pity', when coming
out of Arjuna's own mouth, gains a more realistic
expression. Arjuna says: "seeing my kinsmen gathered
here anxiously determined to fight, my limbs shiver"...,
etc.
All these symptoms are described in the text-books of
modern psychology as typical symptoms of the mental
disease named 'anxiety-state-neurosis.'
30. The Gandiva-bow slips from my hand, and my skin burns all
over; I am also unable to stand and my mind is whirling round,
as it were.
29

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here Arjuna is adding some more details of the symptoms
of his disease. Earlier we had a list of symptoms that
manifested on the physical body. Now in this stanza,
Arjuna tries to report recognised symptoms of the maladjustments at his mental level.
Not only is his mind unsteady, agitated and chaotic, but it
has lost all its morale. It has come down to the stupid level
of accepting and recognising superstitious omens
portending
disastrous
failures
and
imminent
consequences.
NOT ONLY DOES THE FOLLOWING STANZA
VIVIDLY PICTURE TO US HIS MENTAL CONFUSIONS,
BUT
IT
ALSO
SHOWS
HOW
FAR
HIS
DISCRIMINATION HAS BEEN DRAINED OFF, AND
HIS MORALE DESTROYED.
31. And I see adverse omens, O Keshava. Nor do I see any good
in killing my kinsmen in battle.
In this state of mental confusion, when his emotions have
been totally divorced from his intellect, the 'objectivemind,' without the guidance of its 'subjective-aspect,' runs
wild and comes to some unintelligent conclusions. He
says, 'I desire neither victory, nor empire, nor even
pleasure.' It is a recognised fact that a patient of hysteria,
when allowed to talk, will, in a negative way, express the
very cause for the attack. For example, when a woman,
hysterically raving, repeatedly declares with all emphasis,
30

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

that she is not tired of her husband that she still respects
him, that he still loves her, that there is no rupture
between them, etc., she, by these very words, clearly
indicates the exact cause of her mental chaos.
Similarly, the very denials of Arjuna clearly indicate to all
careful readers how and why he got into such a state of
mental grief. He desired victory. He urgently wanted the
kingdom. He anxiously expected to win pleasures for
himself and his relations. But the challenging look of the
mighty Kaurava forces and the great and eminent
warriors standing ready to fight, shattered his hopes,
blasted his ambitions, and undermined his self-confidence
and he slowly developed the well-known "Arjunadisease," the cure for which is the theme of the Geeta.
32. For, I desire not victory, O Krishna, nor kingdom, nor
pleasures. Of what avail is dominion to us, O Govinda? Of
what avail are pleasures or even life itself?
33. They for whose sake we desire kingdom, enjoyment and
pleasures stand here in battle, having renounced life and wealth.
34. Teachers, fathers, sons and also grandfathers, maternal
uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other
relatives.
Arjuna continues his arguments to Krishna against the
advisability of such a civil war between the two factions of
31

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the same royal family. A Dharma-hunting Arjuna is here
mentally manufacturing a case for himself justifying his
cowardly retreat from the post of duty where destiny has
called upon him to act.
He repeats what he had said earlier because Krishna, with
his pregnant silence, is criticising Arjuna's attitude. The
provocatively smiling lips of the Lord are whipping
Arjuna into a sense of shame. He wants the moral support
of his friend and charioteer to come to the conclusion that
what he is feeling in his own mind is acceptable and just.
But the endorsement and the intellectual sanction are not
forthcoming from either the look of Krishna or the Lord's
words.
35. These I do not wish to kill, though they kill me, O
Madhusudana, even for the sake of dominion over the three
worlds; how much less for the sake of the earth.
Feeling that he had not expressed his case strongly
enough to Krishna to make him come to this conclusion,
and, assuming that it was because of this that the Lord
had not given his assent to it, Arjuna decided to declare
with a mock spirit of renunciation, that he had so much
large-heartedness in him that he would not kill his
cousins, even if they were to kill him. The climax came
when Arjuna, with quixotic exaggeration, declared that he
would not fight the war, even if he were to win all the
32

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

three worlds of the universe, much less so for the mere
Hastinapura-kingship.
36. Killing these sons of Dhritarashtra, what pleasure can be
ours, O Janardana? Sin alone will be our gain by killing these
felons.
In spite of all that Arjuna said so far, Krishna is as silent as
a sphinx. Therefore, Arjuna gives up his melodramatic
expression and assumes a softer, a more appealing tone
and takes the attitude of explaining in vain, a serious
matter to a dull-witted friend. The change of strategy
becomes conspicuously ludicrous when we notice
Krishna's continued silence!!
In the first line of the stanza he explains to Krishna that no
good can arise out of killing the sons of Dhritarashtra...
still the wooden-smile of Krishna does not change and the
Pandava hero, his intelligence shattered, tries to find a
cause for Krishna's attitude. Immediately, he remembers
that the Kaurava brothers were behaving towards the
Pandavas as felons. 'Atatayinah' means felons, who
deserve to be killed according to the Artha Shastra.
Sin is only a mistake committed by a misunderstood
individual ego against its own Divine Nature as the
Eternal Soul. To act as the body or the mind or the intellect
is not to act up to the responsibilities of a man but it
becomes an attempt to behave under the impulses of an
33

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

animal. All those acts performed and motives entertained,
which create grosser mental impressions and thereby
build stronger walls between us and our cognition of the
Real Divine Spark in ourselves are called sins.
Arjuna's seemingly learned objection to killing enemies is
a misinterpretation of our sacred texts (Shastra), and to
have acted upon it would have been suicidal to our very
culture. Therefore, Krishna refuses to show any sign either
of appreciation or criticism of Arjuna's stand. The Lord
understands that his friend is raving hysterically and the
best policy is to allow a mental patient first of all to bring
out everything in his mind and thus exhaust himself.
37. Therefore we shall not kill the sons of Dhritarashtra, our
relatives; for how can we be happy by killing our own people, O
Madhava?
Here, Arjuna concludes his seemingly logical arguments
which have got a false look of Hindu scriptural sanction.
More than deliberate blasphemers of a scripture, the
unconscious misinterpreters of a sacred text are the
innocent criminals who bring about the wretched
downfall of its philosophy. Purring with the satisfaction of
a cat in the kitchen, Arjuna, in this verse, is licking up his
arguments all round and is coming to the dangerous
conclusion that he should not kill the aggressors, nor face
their heartless challenge! Even then Krishna is silent.
34

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjun's discomfiture makes him really quite conspicuous
in his ugliness. In the second line of the stanza, he makes a
personal appeal to Krishna and almost begs of him to
think for himself and endorse Partha's own lunatic
conclusions.
With the familiarity born out of his long-standing
friendship, Arjuna addresses his charioteer with affection
as Madhava, and asks him how one can come to any
happiness after one has destroyed one's own kinsmen...
Still, Krishna remains silent.
38. Though these, with their intelligence clouded by greed, see
no evil in the destruction of the families in the society, and no
sin in their cruelty to friends; . . .
39. Why should not we, who clearly see evil in the destruction of
the family-units, learn to turn away from this sin, O
Janardana?
No doubt, the Kauravas, grown blind in their greed for
power and wealth, cannot see the destruction of the entire
social structure by this war. Their ambition has so
completely clouded their intelligence and sensibility that
they fail to appreciate or understand the cruelty in
annihilating their own friends.
But Arjuna seems to retain his reasoning capacity and can
clearly foresee the chaos in which society will get buried
by fratricidal war. Now his argument amounts to this: if a
35

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

friend of ours, in his drunkenness, behaves nastily, it
would be worse than drunkenness in us, if we were to
retaliate; for, we are expected to know that our friend,
with his fumed-up intelligence, does not entertain enough
discriminative awareness of what he is doing. At such
moments, it would be our duty to forgive the mischief and
overlook the impudence.
Similarly, here, Arjuna argues: "If Duryodhana and his
friends are behaving as blind aggressors, should the
Pandavas not retire quietly and suffer the ignominy of a
defeat, and consider it their dutiful offering at the altar of
peace?" How far this philosophy is dangerous in itself will
be seen as we read more and more the passages of the
Geeta and come to appreciate the pith of its philosophy
which is the very kernel of our Hindu way-of-living.
"Active resistance to evil" is the central idea in the doctrine
expounded by Krishna in the Geeta.
40. In the destruction of a family, the immemorial religious rites
of that family perish; on the destruction of spirituality, impiety
overcomes the whole family.
Just as a story-teller comes to add new details each time he
narrates the same old story, so too, Arjuna seems to draw
new inspiration from his foolishness, and each time his
creative intelligence puts forth fresh arguments in support
of his wrong philosophy. As soon as he finishes a stanza,
36

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

he gets, as it were, a new lease of arguments to prattle,
and takes refuge behind their noise.
He indicates here that, when individual families are
destroyed, along with them the religious traditions of the
society will also end, and soon an era of impiety will be
ushered in.
Cultural experiments were the pre-occupations of our
fore-fathers and they knew that the culture and tradition
of each family was a unit of the total culture and integrity
of the whole nation. Hence the important of the familyDharma so seriously brought forth by Arjuna as an
argument against this civil war.
41. By the prevalence of impiety, O Krishna, the women of the
family become corrupt; and women being corrupted, O
descendent of the Vrishni-clan, there arises "intermingling of
castes" (VARNA-SAMKARA) .
Continuing the argument in the previous verse, Partha
declares the consequences that will follow when the true
moral integrity of the families is destroyed. Slowly the
morality in the society will wane and there will be an
"admixture of castes."
Caste is a word, which, in its perverted meaning, has
recently come in for a lot of criticism from the educated;
and they, no doubt, are all justified, if caste, in reality,
meant what we understand it to be in our society today.
37

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

But what we witness around us, in the name of caste, is
the ugly decadence into which the Hindu way-of-living
has fallen. Caste, in those days, was conceived of as an
intelligent division of the available manpower in the
community on the basis of intellectual and mental
capacities of the individuals.
Those who were intellectuals and had a passion for
research and study were styled Brahmanas (Brahmins);
those who had political ambitions for leadership and took
upon themselves the risky art of maintaining peace and
plenty and saving the country from internal and external
aggressions, were called the Kshatriyas; those who served
the community though agriculture and trade were the
Vaishyas and, lastly, all those who did not fall in any of the
above categories were styled as Shudras, whose duties in
society were service and labour. Our modern social
workers and officials, agricultural and industrial labourers
all must fall under this noble category!
In the largest scope of its implication, when we thus
understand the caste-system, it is the same as today's
professional groups. Therefore, when they talk so
seriously about the inadvisability of "admixture of the
castes," they only mean what we already know to be true
in our own social pattern: an engineer in charge of a
hospital and working in the operation-theatre as a doctor
would be a social danger, as much as a doctor would be if
he is appointed as an officer for planning, guiding and
executing a hydro-electric scheme!
38

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When the general morality of society has decayed; the
young men and women, blinded by uncontrolled passion,
start mingling without restraint. And lust knows no logic
and cares least for better evolution or better culture. There
will be thereafter, unhealthy intermingling of
incompatible cultural traits.
42. 'Confusion of castes' leads the slayer of the family to hell; for
their forefathers fall, deprived of the offerings of PINDA (riceball) and water (libations) .
The argument is still continued and Arjuna points out the
consequences of "caste-admixture." When confusion of the
castes has taken place, both outside in the moral life of
true discipline and in one's own inner temperament, then
the family tradition gets flouted and ruined.
In the context of our discourses, we must understand that
to the dead it is bread-and-water to see that their
survivors maintain and continue the cultural purity that
they themselves had so laboriously cultivated and
inculcated into the minds of their children. In case the
society squanders away its culture, so laboriously built up
as a result of the slow blossoming of the social values of
life through generations of careful cultivation necessarily,
we will be insulting the very labours of our ancestors. It is
attractive and poetic, indeed, to conceive of the dead as
watching over their survivors and observing their ways of
living from the balcony of their heavenly abode! It would
certainly be as painful as the pains of hunger and thirst to
39

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

them if they were to find that their survivors were
deliberately making a jungle of their laboriously laid
gardens. Understood thus, the entire stanza appears to be
very appropriate.
Each generation passes down the torch of its culture to the
next generation, its children, and it is for them to preserve,
tend and nourish that torch and hand it over carefully to
the succeeding generation, if not more, at least no less
bright, than when they got it.
In India, the sages discovered and initiated a culture that
is spiritual, and this spiritual culture is maintained and
worked out through religious practices, and therefore,
culture and religion are, to the Hindu, one and the same.
Very rarely we find any mention of the term culture, as
such, in our ancient literature. More often we meet with
the insistence on and the mention of our religious
practices.
In fact, the Hindu religion is a technique by which this
spiritual culture can be maintained and worked out in the
community. Therefore, we find in these stanzas, and in
similar contexts, always, an enthusiastic emphasis upon
the religious life, whether it be in the family or in the
society. Dharma comprises those divine values-of-life by
living which we manifest more and more the essential
spiritual being in us. Family-Dharma (Kula-Dharma) is thus
nothing but the rules of living, thinking, and acting in a
united, well-planned family. By strictly following these
40

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

rules we soon come to learn, in the prayer-rooms of our
homes, how to live as better citizens of the Aryan-culture.
43. By these evil deeds of the 'destroyers of the family, ' which
cause confusion of castes, the eternal religious rites of the caste
and the family are destroyed.
What was said in the discourse upon the last stanza will
become amply clear by this statement of Arjuna. Here also
he bemoans that, as a result of the civil war, the religious
traditions of the family will all be lost and when he says
so, as I have said earlier, if we understand religion as the
"spiritual culture of India," --- the training for which was
primarily given in the individual homes --- then the stanza
becomes self-explanatory. We also know that, after a war
there is a sudden cracking up of the existing cultural
values in any society. Our modern world, panting and
sighing under the burden of its own immoralities and
deceits, is an example of how war brings about, not only
disabled men with amputated limbs, but also deeper
ulcers and uglier deformities in their mental make-up.
In these words, we can detect in Arjuna almost the world's
first conscientious objector to war! In these passages he
offers a splendid series of pacifist arguments good for all
times!!
44. We have heard, O Janardana, that it is inevitable for those
men, in whose families the religious practices have been
destroyed, to dwell in hell for an unknown period of time.
41

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Krishna still refuses to speak. Arjuna has come to a point
where he can neither stop talking nor find any more
arguments. Strangely compelling is the grace of the Lord's
dignified silence. Here, in the stanza, Arjuna almost
concludes his arguments and mentions the tradition
which he had heard, that "men whose family-religion has
broken down will go to hell."
But, on the other hand, when we understand the
statement in all its scientific implications, even the worst
of us will feel the immediate urgency for revolutionising
our point of view. We have already seen that the family
Dharma means, in the context of our times, only the
cultural purity in the family, which is the unit of the
community. We also found that since their culture is
essentially spiritual, to the Hindus "religion is culture."
So, Arjuna implies that when the unity of home-life is
shattered, and when purity of living and sanctity of
thought are destroyed in the individual home-life, the
generation that has caused such a shattering is ordering
for itself and for others a melancholy era of hellish
sorrows and sufferings.
45. Alas! We are involved in a great sin, in that we are prepared
to kill our kinsmen, from greed for the pleasures of the kingdom.
Though pitiable, it is indeed pleasantly ludicrous to watch
Arjuna's intellectual exhaustion and emotional weariness
as expressed in this verse. In his effeminate lack of self42

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

confidence here he bemoans, "Alas! We are involved, etc."
These words clearly show that instead of becoming a
master of the situation, Arjuna is now a victim of it. He
has not the virile confidence that he is the master of the
circumstances and, therefore, with a creeping sense of
growing inner cowardice, he feels almost helplessly
persecuted.
This unhealthy mental weakness drains off his heroism
and he desperately tries to put a paper-crown upon his
cowardice, to make it look divine and angelic, and to
parade it as 'pity'. Thus, he deliberately misconstrues the
very aim of the war and imputes a low motive to the
righteous war simply because he wants to justify his
pacifist idea, which does not instinctively gurgle out from
his known strength, but which oozes out from his
ulcerated mind.
46. If the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapons-in-hand, slay me in
battle, unresisting and unarmed, that would be better for me.
Here, Arjuna declares his FINAL opinion that, under the
circumstances narrated during his long-drawn limping
arguments, it is better for him to die in battle unresisting
and unarmed, even if the Kauravas were to shoot him
down, like a hunted deer, with a dozen arrows piercing
his royal body!
The word that Arjuna uses here is particularly to be noted;
the texture of the word used is, in itself, a great
43

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

commentary upon the thought in the mind of the one who
has made the statement. Kshema is the material and
physical victory, while Moksha is the spiritual Selfmastery. Though Arjuna's arguments were all labouring
hard to paint the idea that to have fought that was was
against the spiritual culture of the country (Moksha), he
himself stated in his conclusions that not to fight this war
would be a material blessing (Kshema) inasmuch as an
escape from the battle-field now is to gain, perhaps, sure
physical security!!
In short, anxiety for the fruit-of-his-action (victory in
battle) demoralised Arjuna and he got himself into an
'anxiety-state-neurosis.'
Sanjaya said : 47. Having thus spoken in the midst of the battlefield, Arjuna sat down on the seat of the chariot, casting away
his bow and arrow, with a mind distressed with sorrow.
The concluding stanza of this chapter contains the words
of Sanjaya in which he gave the running commentary of
what he saw on the battle-field. Exhausted by his weary
arguments, Arjuna, completely shattered within, sank
back on the flag-staff in the open chariot, throwing down
his kingly weapons.
This is the scene at which we shall leave Arjuna in the
First Chapter of the Geeta.

44

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the first discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF THE ARJUNA-GRIEF
In the scriptural text-books of ancient times the end of a
chapter was indicated by some sign or symbol. In modern
days, this is not necessary, inasmuch as, we have the
passages in print before us and we can see that one section
or chapter has ended and another has begun. Even here,
the printers have to mark the end of one chapter and, by a
separate title, indicate the beginning of the next.
In olden days, it was much more difficult, since books
were not printed, and each student got during his study a
new edition of the scripture printed on the memory-slabs
of his own mind. Since scripture-study was in those days
from mouth to mouth, the students had to memorise
whole text-books and chant them daily. In such a case it
was necessary to have some word or words to inform both
the reciter and the listeners as to the ending of a section
and the fresh beginning of another. This was done by
some conventional symbol.
In the Upanishads, the accepted method was to recite the
last Mantra or the concluding portion of the last Mantra of
the chapter twice. In the Geeta, however, we have the
repetition of a statement, which may be considered as an
epilogue, in Sanskrit called a Sankalpa Vakya. The same
Sankalpa is repeated at the end of each chapter, the
45

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

difference being only that at the end of each chapter, the
chapter-number is mentioned along with the special title
of that chapter.
The Geeta Sankalpa vakya (Epilogue) is a beautiful
statement of pregnant words conveying a wealth of details
regarding the very text-book. Sreemad-Bhagawad-Geeta
has been considered here as an Upanishad-nay, each
chapter in the Geeta is considered as an Upanishad; and
among the eighteen Upanishads, together constituting the
Divine Song, we here end the first of them entitled "THE
YOGA OF ARJUNA'S DESPONDENCY." These chapters
are called Upanishads because these are declarations
concealing such deep significances that a hasty reader will
miss their full import unless he does long and intense
meditation over the wealth of suggestive meaning that lies
concealed behind the simple-looking stanzas. As in the
Upanishads, here also we need the help of a sympathetic
teacher who can train us in the art of opening the seven
hundred lockers in the treasure chamber of the Geeta.
Upanishad is a word indicating a literature that is to be
studied by sitting (shad), near (upa) a teacher, in a spirit of
receptive meekness and surrender (ni). The contents of the
scriptural text-books are, all over the world, always the
same. They teach us that there is a changeless Reality
behind the ever-changing phenomenal world of
perceptions, feelings and understanding. This great
ADVAITIC TRUTH as declared in the Hindu scriptural
text-books is termed the Brahman and, therefore, the text46

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

book that teaches us the nature of Brahman and shows us
the means of realising it is called Brahman-knowledge
(Brahma-Vidya).
Unlike Western philosophy, among the Aryans a theory is
accepted as a philosophy only when the philosopher
prescribes for us a practical technique by which all seekers
can come to discover and experience for themselves the
GOAL indicated in that philosophy. Thus, in all Hindu
philosophies there are two distinct sections: one
explaining the theory and the other describing the
technique of practice. The portion that explains the
technique of living the philosophy and coming to a close
subjective experience is called Yoga Shastra.
The word Yoga comes from the root Yuj = to join. Any
conscious attempt on the part of an individual to lift his
present available personality and attune it to a higher,
perfect ideal, is called Yoga, and the science of Yoga is
called Yoga Shastra. Since in this epilogue, the Geeta is
called a Yoga Shastra, we must expect to discover in the
SONG OF THE LORD, not only airy philosophical
expositions of a Truth too subtle for the ordinary man to
grasp, but also instructions by which every one of us can,
from this present state of imperfection, hope to reach, step
by step, the giddy heights of the Divine pinnacles, that
stand eternally swathed in the transcendental glory of
Absolute Perfection.

47

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The theme of philosophy and Yoga cannot be very
attractive to the ordinary men of the world because it is so
scientific and it deals with imperceptible ideologies.
Mathematics cannot be thrilling reading except for a
mathematician; and mathematics can very well afford to
ignore those who have no taste for it. But religion tries to
serve all and the anxiety of all prophets is to serve every
one in all generations. Thus, in order to tame a difficult
theme and to contain it within the ambit of a text-book of
universal acceptance, the teachers of old had to discover
methods by which the subjective ideologies could be
given an appealing look of substantial objectivity. This
was done by giving a detailed picture of the teacher, so
that in our mental image he is so much familiarised that
we feel his words also as something very familiar to us.
In the tradition of the Hindu text-books, the great Rishis
worked out the subtle ideas containing the crystallised
truths into an easily digestible capsule called Dharma. In
the Upanishads, we have a complete picture of a teacher
and a taught, painted with hasty strokes, unfinished and
rough. In the Geeta, on the other hand, it being a
philosophical discourse embedded in the mythology of
the nation, we find a finished picture, palpitating with life,
against a scintillating situation, wherein the very same
ancient truths have been re-asserted.
Lord Krishna is now made to repeat the Upanishadic truths
in the context of a great conflict to serve his life-long
friend Arjuna, who is shown as seriously suffering from a
48

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

total mental rupture. Therefore, we shall expect in the
Geeta a much more sympathetic explanation and
guidance than when the same truths came out from the
inspired saints, who were not as much in contact with the
weaknesses of ordinary mortals. This glory of the Geeta
has been indicated here when the Sankalpa Vakya says that
it is a conversation between the Lord and a mortal.
This chapter is called by a self-contradicting title. It is
named as the Yoga of ARJUNA'S GRIEF. If 'grief' could be
Yoga, almost all of us, without a choice, are already
Yogins. In the commentary of this chapter, I indicated that
the Arjuna-condition of utter despair is the auspicious
mental attitude wherein the Geeta-seeds are to be sown,
and the flowers of Krishna-perfection gathered. Be it in an
individual or a society, in a community or a nation,
religion and philosophy will be in demand only when the
heart has come to experience the Arjuna-grief.
To the extent that the world of today has felt its
incompetence to face the battle of life, not daring to
destroy their near and dear values of economic expansion
and industrial lust, to that extent it is fit for listening to the
message of the Geeta. Just as the act of cooking, by itself, is
not fulfilled without the eating that follows, so also, in
spite of the best that may be available in life, a sense of
incompleteness is felt and a deep hunger to gain a better
awareness and fuller existence in the world is
experienced. The scriptural texts cannot in themselves
help any one. Since this mental condition is so
49

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

unavoidable before the actual Yoga is started, even the
initial mental condition is called, by a wishful anticipation,
as Yoga. For learning and living the Geeta, the Arjunacondition is the initial Sadhana.
Om Om Om Om Om

Chapter 2
Sankhya Yoga
The Yoga of Knowledge
Sanjaya said: 1. To him who was thus overcome with pity and
despondency, with eyes full of tears and agitated, Madhusudana
spoke these words.
The second chapter opens with an announcement from
Sanjaya which, with a few rightly chosen words, gives a
complete picture of Arjuna's sad mental state of
desperation. His mind had become overwhelmed with
pity and sorrow. The very expression clearly indicates that
Arjuna was not the master of the situation at that time, but
on the contrary, the situation had Arjuna as its victim! To
get ourselves over-ridden by life's circumstances is to
50

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ensure disastrous failures on all occasions. Only a
weakling, who allows himself to be overpowered by
circumstances, can be victimised by the outer happenings.
Arjuna, in his present neurotic condition, has become a
slave to the outer challenges.
The estimate of Sanjaya not only describes to us the
mental condition of Arjuna but also pointedly gives us a
hint that the cracking of the inner personality of Arjuna
has made deep fissures into the character of the great
hero. The greatest archer of his time, Arjuna, has been so
totally impoverished within that he has come to weep like
a simple maiden!
To Arjuna, thus overwhelmed by an emotion of misplaced
pity and tearless weeping, Madhusudana (slayer of the
demon, Madhu), Lord Krishna, spoke the following
words. Here, it is to be noted that modern psychology has
also observed and recorded that a tearless weeping is the
climax in the attack of hysteria.
The Blessed Lord said: 2. Whence is this perilous condition come
upon thee, this dejection, un-Aryan-like, heaven-excluding,
disgraceful, O Arjuna?
The Lord of the Hindus is surprised to see that a king,
claiming to be an Aryan, is feeling so flabbergasted on the
battlefield. The instinct of a true Aryan is to be balanced
and equipoised in all conditions of life and to face
situations diligently, compelling them to change their
51

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

threatening attitude and make them favourable to himself.
When life is courted properly, even the ugliest situation
can be transformed into a charming smile of success.
Everything depends upon the intelligent man's dexterity
in steering himself upon the bumping roads of life. Thus,
Lord Krishna characterises Arjuna's behaviour as unAryan. The Aryans are extremely sensitive to the higher
calls of life, righteousness and nobility, both in thought
and action.
The Divine Charioteer is quite surprised at discovering
such an attitude in his friend, whom he had known for
years through thick and thin. The mood of dejection was,
in fact, quite alien to the mental make-up and intellectual
nature of Arjuna. Thus, we have here an expression of
wonder and the Lord asks, "Whence comes upon thee this
dejection, etc..."
It is believed by the Hindus that to die fighting for
righteousness is the duty of one born in a family of kings
and by so sacrificing his life on the battle-field for a noble
cause, he reaches and enjoys the Heaven of the Heroes
(Veera-Swarga).
3. Yield not to impotence, O Partha! It does not befit thee, Cast
off this mean weakness of heart! Stand up, O Parantapa (O
scorcher of foes) !
In stinging reproachful words, Krishna is deliberately
lashing at the anxiety-state-neurotic in Arjuna. Krishna,
52

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

who was so far silent, is now bursting forth into an
eloquence, in which every word is a chosen missile, a
pounding hammer-stroke that can flatten any victim.
The word 'Klaibyam' means, the mental attitude of one
who is neither masculine enough to feel a passionate
courage and daring, nor womanly enough to feel the soft
emotions of hesitation and despair. In modern parlance,
sometimes friends wonder at the impotency of another
friend and express their surprise with such an exclamation
as, "Is he a man or a woman?" --- meaning that from his
behaviour it is not very easy to decide which characteristic
is predominant in him. Emotionally, therefore, Arjuna is
behaving now as a contradiction; effeminately-manly and
masculinely-effeminate, just as a eunuch of the Indian
royal courts --- looks like a man but dresses as a woman,
talks like a man but feels like a woman, physically strong
but mentally weak!
So far Krishna was silent and the silence had a deep
meaning. Arjuna, overwhelmed with compassion, had
taken the decision not to fight and was all along mustering
arguments in support of it. As a diplomat, Krishna knew
that it would have been useless to contradict his friend
earlier when he was inspired to argue eloquently in
support of his own wrong estimate of things. But the tears
in the eyes of Arjuna indicated that his inward confusion
had reached a climax.

53

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In the tradition of religious devotion, it is very truly said
and firmly believed all over the world, that the Lord, in
His high seat, keeps mum and is almost deaf so long as we
are arguing and asserting our maturity as intellectual
beings. But when we come down to live and act as
emotional beings, when tears of desperation trickle down
the cheeks of true devotees, then, unasked, the LORD OF
COMPASSION rushes forward to reach the lost souls and
guides them out of their inward darkness to the
resplendent LIGHT OF WISDOM. A soul, identifying with
the intellect, can seek and discover itself; but, when it is
identifying with the mind, it needs the help and guidance
of the Lord.
The touch of the Lord's grace, when it descends upon His
devotees, is invariably felt by the seekers more as an
avalanche than as a refreshing shower of Divine Mercy.
Spiritual Grace must necessarily re-orientate the heart and
burn away its negativities before the Spirit can radiate its
sway upon matter. True to this great principle observed
everywhere and experienced by every true seeker, in the
Geeta too, we find that, when the silent Lord, from the
Charioteer's seat, started speaking, His words gleamed
and landed like lightning on Arjuna to burn his wrong
mental tendencies in the fire of shame.
Soft words of sympathy could not have revived Arjuna's
drooping mind to vigour. Thus Krishna rightly lashed his
friend with these stinging arrows of ridicule, dipped in the
54

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

acid of satire!! Krishna ends his "word-treatment" with an
appeal to Arjuna to "Get up and act."
Arjuna said: 4. How, O Madhusudana, shall I, in battle, fight
with arrows against Bhishma and Drona, who are fit to be
worshipped, O destroyer of enemies!
The motive-hunting cowardice in Arjuna has come to pick
up a great argument, seemingly quite convincing to the
undiscriminating. On the other hand, to one who has not
lost his balance and who knows perfectly the art of
evaluating such a situation, this is no problem at all, and
Arjuna's arguments are quite hollow. The war that is
imminent is not between individuals due to any personal
rivalry. Arjuna has no personality apart from the
Pandava-forces, and the pair, Drona and Bhishma, are also
not mere individual entities; in their identification, they
are the Kaurava-forces. The two forces are arrayed to fight
for certain principles. The Kauravas are fighting for their
policy-of-Adharma. The Pandavas are fighting for the
principles-of-Dharma as enunciated in the ancient lore of
the Hindus.
So glorious being the cause, when the two armies
representing the will of the People have marshalled
themselves, Arjuna, the hero, had no individual right to
accept any personal honour or dishonour, or to insist on
any respect or disrespect, in meeting the individuals who
were champions of the wrong side. Without taking this
total view-point of the situation, Arjuna made the mistake
55

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of arrogating to himself an individual ego and observed
the problems through the glasses of his ego. He
recognised himself to be the disciple of Drona and the
grandson of Bhishma. The very same teacher and
grandsire were also seeing Arjuna in the opposite camp,
but they felt no compunction, because they had no such
egoistic misconceptions. They drowned their individuality
in the cause they were championing. In short, Arjuna's
egoism was the cause for his terrible moral confusions and
misconceptions.
I have often discussed this portion with some of the best
men of our country and I have found all of them justifying
Arjuna's argument. That is to say, this is a very subtle
point to be decided and, perhaps, Vyasa thought of
solving this riddle for the society with the very principles
of Hinduism for the guidance of future generations. The
more we identify ourselves with the little 'I' in us, the
more will be our problems and confusions in life. When
we expand ourselves through our larger identifications --with an army, a cause or a principle, or a nation or an age
--- we shall find our moral confusions dwindling into
almost nothingness. Perfect morality can be declared and
lived only by him who has sought to live and discover his
real identity with the Self which is ONE WITHOUT A
SECOND, EVERYWHERE, IN ALL BEINGS AND
FORMS. Later on, we shall find Krishna advising this
TRUTH as a philosophical treatment for Arjuna's mental
rehabilitation.
56

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

5. Better indeed, in this world, is to eat even the bread of
'beggary' than to slay the most noble of teachers. But, if I kill
them, even in this world, all my enjoyments of wealth and
desires will be stained with blood.
Continuing his high sounding but futile arguments, due to
his false estimate of himself and his problem, Arjuna
poses here as a martyr of his own morality and ethical
goodness.
His gurus, meaning both Drona and Bhishma, are
characterised here as Mahanubhavah --- men who were the
ideals of their age, symbolising the best in our culture,
who, in their broad-mindedness and courage of
conviction, had themselves offered many a sacrifice at the
altars of the Sanatana Dharma, the Hindu science of perfect
living. Such noble men, who formed the very touch-stones
of our culture in that era, were not to be eliminated from
life, merely for the fulfilment of an individual's appetite
for power and position. Not only in their own age, but for
millenarian, the world would be impoverished by the
heartless squandering of such precious lives.
Thus, Arjuna says that it would be nobler for himself and
the Pandava-brothers to live upon the bread of beggary
than to gain kingship after destroying all the glorious
flowers in the garden of our culture. After annihilating
them all, elders and teachers, even supposing the
Pandavas actually got their kingdom back, Arjuna points
out how his noble Aryan-heart would not be able to enjoy
57

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

either the kingdom or its wealth; for everything would be
smeared by the bitter memories of the precious blood that
would have been spilt in the war.
Once we misread a situation, sentiments cloud our
understanding and then we too act in life as Arjuna did in
his. This is clearly indicated here in the detailed narration
of the incident by Vyasa.
6. I can scarcely say which will be better, that we should
conquer them or that they should conquer us. Even the sons of
Dhritarashtra, after slaying whom we do not wish to live, stand
facing us.
The two earlier stanzas from Arjuna, no doubt, indicate to
us the state of perplexity and confusion in his 'objectivemind.' That the state of hysteria within has now
developed to attack even his intellectual composure is
indicated in this stanza. The stimuli coming from the array
of the enemy-lines, as they touched his 'objective-mind,'
created therein a problem, to solve which, he needed the
guidance of the rational capacities of his intellect --- the
'subjective-mind.' Split as he was within, his mental
personality, divorced from his intellect, could not easily
come to any definite decision. His egoistic self-evaluation
and the ego-created intense anxieties for the fruits of the
great war, stood, as it were, between his mind and
intellect, separating them and creating between them, an
almost unbridgeable gulf; hence, Arjuna's confusions here.
58

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The mind, generally functioning as an efficient "receivingand-despastching-clerk," receives the information of the
perceptions conveyed to it by the sense-organs, and after
arranging these perceptions in order, conveys them to the
intellect for its judgement. The intellect, with reference to
its own stored-up memories of similar experiences in the
past, comes to final decisions which are conveyed to the
mind for execution; and the mind in its turn issues the
necessary orders for the organs-of-action to act upon. All
these are happening at every moment, all through our
waking-state, in our intelligent existence in the midst of
the objects of the world.
Where these equipments are not functioning cooperatively, with perfect team spirit, the personality of the
individual is shattered and he becomes inefficient in
meeting life as a victorious mortal. The rehabilitation of
that individual is the re-adjustment and re-education of
his inner world and where his personality is once again
tuned up and adjusted, he comes to exhibit better
efficiency in life.
Poor Arjuna, victimised not so much by the external
world as by his own mental condition, is seen here as
being incapable of judging whether he should conquer his
enemy or, by an ignoble retreat, allow them to conquer
him. In this stanza, Vyasa is indicating to us that the
hysteria in Arjuna was not only mental, but also at the
level of the intellect.
59

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

7. My heart is overpowered by the taint of pity; my mind is
confused as to duty. I ask Thee. Tell me decisively what is good
for me. I am Thy disciple. Instruct me, who have taken refuge in
Thee.
In this stanza, when Arjuna has completely realised the
helpless impotency in himself to come to any decision, he
surrenders totally to Krishna. He, in his own words,
admits the psychological shattering felt and lived by him
in his bosom. He has instinctively diagnosed, correctly,
even the cause of it to be "an uncontrollable amount of
over-whelming pity." Of course, Arjuna does not realise
that it is his misplaced compassion; but, whatever it be,
the patient is now under the mental stress of extreme
confusion and bewilderment.
Arjuna confesses that his intellect (Chetas) has gone behind
a cloud of confusions regarding what Dharma and
Adharma are at that moment for him. The problem --whether to fight and conquer the enemies or not to fight
and allow the enemies to conquer him --- which needed an
urgent solution, could not be rationally judged with the
depleted mental capacities of Arjuna.
We have already explained Dharma and found that the
Dharma of a thing 'is the law of its being.' A thing cannot
remain itself without faithfully maintaining its own
nature, and 'THAT NATURE, WHICH MAKES A THING
WHAT IT IS' is called Dharma. Hinduism insists on the
Manava Dharma, meaning, it insists that men should be
60

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

true to their own essential nature, which is godly and
divine, and, therefore, all efforts in life should be directed
towards maintaining themselves in the dignity of the Soul
and not plod on through life like helpless animals.
Here Arjuna indicates that he is quite ready to follow all
the instructions of the Lord and maintain perfect faith in
the wisdom of his Divine Charioteer. The Pandava must
also be considered to have indicated that, if he, in his
foolishness, were to raise doubts, even for the thousandth
time, Krishna should have the large-heartedness,
compassion and kindness patiently to explain them again
to his disciple. All through the Geeta we come across
many occasions when Arjuna punctuates Krishna's
message with his own doubts. Never does Krishna, even
once, grow impatient with his disciple. On the other hand,
each question, as it were, is seen to have added more
enthusiasm and interest to the discourses on the battlefield.
8. I do not see that it would remove this sorrow that burns up
my senses, even if I should attain prosperous and unrivalled
dominion on earth, or even Lordship over the gods.
Arjuna is indicating here to Krishna the urgency for
guidance but for which he would be left to suffer the
voiceless agonies of an inward pain. The patient is unable
to explain or even to indicate vaguely, the source from
which the pain is rising in him.
61

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This mental sorrow in Arjuna is "blasting" even his sense
organs! Under the heavy burden of his sorrows he finds it
very difficult even to see or hear things properly. Even his
Indriyas (sense-organs), are being blasted by the
overheated sorrows within him.
It is natural for any reasonable human being to feel an
intellectual impastience to solve a problem of the mind
and thereby make it quiet and peaceful. Poor Arjuna also
has tried his best to bring some consolation to himself
through his own intellectual discrimination. The sorrow
that he felt was not for the acquisition and possession of
any sensuous object in the outer world, because, as his
own words indicate, he has already thought over them
and found that even an empire comprising the whole
earth, flourishing under his kingship --- nay, a lordship
over the gods even --- would not have wiped off his sense
of sorrow.
The urgency felt by Arjuna, as is evident from his own
words, may be considered as amounting to his burning
aspiration for liberating himself from the limitations of a
mortal. All that he needed to make himself perfect was
right discrimination (Viveka) which the 'LORD OF THE
SENSES' (Hrishikesha) gives him throughout the DIVINE
SONG.
Sanjaya said: 9. Having spoken thus to Hrishikesha, Gudakesha,
the destroyer of foes, said to Govinda: "I will not fight" ; and
became silent.
62

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This stanza and the following, together constitute the
running commentary of Sanjaya the faithful reporter of
the Geeta. He says that, after surrendering himself to
Krishna, seeking the Lord's guidance, Arjuna, the great
CONQUEROR OF SLEEP and the SCORCHER OF HIS
FOES, declared to Krishna, the Lord of the senses, that he
would not fight, and became silent.
No single individual alive at that period had the authority
to call back the armies from the field of Kurukshetra
except the blind old uncle of the Pandavas. He had the
status and the weight of opinion necessary for ordering a
truce even at a time when it looked as though the time had
slipped through the fingers. Sanjaya hoped that
Dhritarashtra would understand the futility of their
fighting against Arjuna, who would certainly conquer the
Kaurava forces, since the "Knotted-haired" warrior
(Gudakesha) had surrendered himself to the Lord of the
senses (Hrishikesha), the Winner of the World (Govinda).
But, Dhritarashtra was born-blind, and had grown deaf to
the words of warning uttered by the good, due to his
infinite attachment to his children.
10. To him who was despondent in the midst of the two armies,
Hrishikesha, as if smiling, O Bharata, spoke these words.
Thus standing between the two forces, the good and the
bad, arrayed for a battle to death, Arjuna (the jeeva)
surrenders completely, to the Lord (the subtler
discriminative intellect), his charioteer, who holds the five
63

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

horses (the five senses) yoked to his chariot (body), under
perfect control. When the stunned and confused ego --Arjuna --- totally surrenders to Krishna, the Lord, with a
smile, reassures the Jeeva of its final victory, and declares
the entire message of spiritual redemption, the Geeta. In
this sense we analyse the picture painted in Sanjaya's
words, borrowing our sanction from the Upanishads.
Once we agree to read this Upanishad-sense in the picture
painted here by the words of Sanjaya, we can discover in
it an Eternal Truth. When the ego (Arjuna) in its dejection
sits back in the body (chariot), throwing down all
instruments of ego-centric activities (Gandiva), and when
the sense-organs (the white-horses) are held back, well
under control, by the pulled-reins (the mind), then the
charioteer (the Pure Intellect) shall lend the ego a divine
strength, and guide it to the ultimate victory over the
forces of Adharma with the help of the dynamism of
Dharma, even though the former may seem much stronger
in force than the simple-looking dynamism in the latter.
The Blessed Lord said: 11. You have grieved for those that
should not be grieved for; yet, you speak words of wisdom. The
wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead.
When we rightly diagnose Arjuna's dejection, it is not very
difficult for us to realise that, though its immediate cause
is the challenge of the war, his condition of mental torture
is only a symptom of a deeper disease. Just as a true
doctor will try to eradicate a disease, not by curing the
64

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

symptoms but by removing the CAUSE of the disease, so
too here, Lord Krishna is trying to remove the very source
of Arjuna's delusion.
The ego rises when the PURE SELF is not recognised; this
deep-seated ignorance in man not only veils his Divine
Nature from himself, but also projects on the REALITY a
positive misconception. The 'ego-centric-idea,' that he is
conditioned by his own body, mind and intellect, is the
true seed of Arjuna's delusory attachments with his own
relations and the consequent deep compassion that has
risen in his bosom to make him so impotent and helpless.
Grief and dejection are the price that delusion demands
from its victim. To rediscover ourselves to be really
something higher than our own ego, is to end all the
sorrows that have come to us, through our false
identifications.
Thus, the ETERNAL SPIRIT in man, asserting its false
relationships with his body, comes to feel bound by a
thousand relationships with the world of things and
beings. The same PERFECT-PRINCIPLE-IN-LIFE, playing
on the field of the mind, comes to experience the
imperfections of the emotional world as its own. Again,
the DIVINE-SPARK-OF-LIFE, assuming, as it often does, a
false identity with the intellect, comes to sob and suffer for
its hopes and desires, its ambitions and ideologies, which
are the characteristic pre-occupastions of the intellect.

65

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The SELF, thus getting reflected in the intellect, the body,
and the senses, is the ego, which is the victim of the world
of objects, feelings and ideas. To this ego, belong all the
sad destinies of life as well as its fleeting thrills of
acquisition and possession. The ego in Arjuna suffered
neurosis, goaded by its own delusions and the consequent
misapprehensions. Krishna, in his INFINITE WISDOM,
knew that MIS-APPREHENSION OF REALITY can take
place only because of a pitiable NON-APPREHENSION
OF REALITY. Therefore, in order to cure the very source
of Arjuna's delusion, Krishna is here teaching him the
cream of knowledge, as declared in the immortal books of
the Hindus, the Upanishads.
A re-education of the mind through metaphysical and
psychic methods is the last word in psycho-therapy,
which the East gave to the world, many thousand years
ago. Krishna starts his entire Geeta lesson with this
attempt at the re-education of Arjuna.
True to that traditional cultural concept of education, here,
the Great Master, Krishna, starts his instructions to Arjuna
with a direct discourse upon the ETERNAL REALITY.
The inner equipments of both Bhishma and Drona
allowed through them a glorious expression of the LIFE
PRINCIPLE or the Soul in them, and these great men were
incomparable due to this Divine shine that beamed out
through them. In this clashing of weapons, to consider
that the cultural soul of Bhishma will be wounded, or that
66

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the life of Drona, the master-archer and military genius,
will be ended, is a delusory concept of an uninitiated
intellect. By this statement Krishna has indicated to
Arjuna a greater Self than the ego in every embodiment.
At every level of our personality, we view Life and come
to our own conclusions about things. Thus, we have a
PHYSICAL ESTIMATE of the world from the body level,
quite distinct from the EMOTIONAL PICTURE of life
from the mental level, and also an INTELLECTUAL
CONCEPT of life from the level of the intellect.
Physically, what I see as a woman, is mentally my mother
and intellectually, the same sacred feminine form is a
bundle of cells, each having in its protoplasmic content, a
nucleus that presides over all its functions. The
imperfections that I see in a physical object will fail to give
me misery, if I successfully gild it with my emotional
appreciation. Similarly, an object which is physically
abhorrent and mentally shameful will still fail to provide
me with any sorrow, if I can appreciate it from my
intellectual level.
So, that which gives me despondency and dejection at the
physical, mental and intellectual levels can yield a
thrilling inspiration if I re-view it from the spiritual level.
Krishna is advising Arjuna to renounce his physical,
emotional and intellectual estimates of his teacher and his
grandsire, and those of the whole battle-field problem,
67

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and to re-evaluate the situation through his spiritual
understanding.
This great and transcendental Truth has been so suddenly
expounded here that it has, on Arjuna, the stunning effect
of a sudden unexpected blast. We shall, later on,
understand how this subtle, psycho-physical shocktherapy did immeasurable good to the hysterical
condition of Arjuna.
"WHY DO THEY DESERVE NO GRIEF? BECAUSE THEY
ARE ETERNAL. HOW?" THE LORD SAYS:
12. It is not that at any time (in the past) , indeed, was I not, nor
were you, nor these rulers of men. Nor, verily, shall we all ever
cease to be hereafter.
Krishna here declares, in unequivocal terms, that the
embodied Self in every one is set on a great pilgrimage in
which It comes to identify itself with varied forms,
temporarily to gain a limited but determined, set of
experiences. He says that neither He Himself nor Arjuna
nor the great kings of the age that have assembled in both
the armies, are mere accidental happenings. They do not
come from nowhere and, at their death, do not become
mere non-existent nothingness. Correct philosophical
thinking guides man's intellect to the apprehension of a
continuity from the past --- through the present --- to the
endless future. The Spirit remaining the same, It gets
68

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

seemingly conditioned by different body-equipments and
comes to live through its self-ordained environments.
It is this conclusion of the Hindu philosophers that has
given them the most satisfactory THEORY OF
REINCARNATION. The most powerful opponents of this
idea do not seem to have studiously followed their own
scriptures. Christ Himself has, if not directly, at least
indirectly, proclaimed this doctrine when He told His
disciples: "John, the Baptist, was Elijah." Origen, the most
learned of the Christian Fathers, has clearly declared:
"Every man received a body for himself according to his
deserts in former lives."
There was no great thinker in the past who had not, nor
any in the present who has not accepted, expressly or
tacitly, these logical conclusions about the DOCTRINE OF
REINCARNATION. Buddha constantly made references
to his previous births. Virgil and Ovid regarded the
doctrine as perfectly self-evident. Josephus observed that
the belief in reincarnation was widely accepted among the
Jews of his age. Solomon's BOOK OF WISDOM says: "To
be born in sound body with sound limbs is a reward of the
virtues of the past lives."
And who does not remember the famous saying of the
learned son of Islam who declared, "I died out of the stone
and I became a plant; I died out of the plant and became
an animal; I died out of the animal and became a man.
69

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Why then should I fear to die? When did I grow less by
dying? I shall die out of man and shall become an angel!!"
In later times, this most intelligent philosophical belief has
been accepted as a doctrine by the German philosophers
Goethe, Fichte, Schelling and Lessing. Among the recent
philosophers, Hume, Spencer, Max Mueller, have all
recognised this doctrine as incontrovertible. Among the
poets of the West also, we find many burnished intellects
soaring into the cloudless sky of imagination and within
their poetic flights they too have intuitively felt the
sanction behind this immortal doctrine-Browning,
Rossetti, Tennyson and Wordsworth, to mention but a few
names.
The REINCARNATION THEORY is not a mere dream of
the philosophers, and the day is not far far off when, with
the fast-developing science of Psychology, the West will
come to rewrite its Scripture under the sheer weight of
observed phenomena. An uncompromising intellectual
quest for understanding life cannot satisfy itself if it is
thwarted at every corner by "observed irregularities." We
cannot, for long, ignore them all as mere 'chances.' The
prodigy Mozart is a spectacular instance which cannot be
explained away; to be logical we must accept the idea of
the continuity of the embodied souls. This genius. wrote
Sonatas at the age of four, played in public at the age of
five, composed his first Opera at the age of seven! Without
the REINCARNATION THEORY, we will have to label
70

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

this wondrous incident as an accident and throw it into
the dust-bin of chance and bury it there!!
Examples are often noticed, but rarely recorded as
evidences, to prove this great THEORY OF
REINCARNATION. The modern world, as I said, has yet
to discover this great and self-evident LAW OF LIFE.
Therefore, to an uninitiated student, this theory may seem
too staggering for quiet appreciation. When Krishna
declared that none of them, including himself, Arjuna and
the great kings, even after their deaths on the battle-field
"shall cease to exist in future," Arjuna, a typical man-of-the
world could not grasp it as a self-evident fact. His
questioning eyes made the Lord explain again the idea
through an example in the following stanza.
"WHY DO THEY DESERVE NO GRIEF? FOR THEY ARE
ETERNAL IN ESSENCE. HOW?"... THE LORD SAYS:
13. Just as in this body the embodied (soul) passes into
childhood, youth and old age, so also does he pass into another
body; the firm man does not grieve at it.
It is the law of memory that the experiencer and the
memoriser must both be the same entity; then alone can
memory power function. I cannot remember any of YOUR
experiences nor can YOU remember any of MY
experiences; I can remember my experiences as readily
and easily as you can remember your experiences.
71

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In old age, everyone of us can remember the main
incidents of his own childhood and youth. In the progress
of growth, childhood dies away and youth appears, and
youth dies before old age can assert itself. In the old man,
it is self-evident that neither his childhood nor his youth is
with him, and yet, he can remember his own early days.
Applying the principle of memory, it becomes quite clear
then that 'SOMETHING' in us is common in all the
different stages of our growth so that the same entity
remembers the experiences gained by it in the past
through the childish body, and later, through the youthful
structure.
Thus, youthfulness may be considered as a birth, when
childhood has met with its death. So too, old age is born
when youth is dead. And yet, none of us is the least
disturbed by these changes; on the other hand, we feel, in
fact, happier due to the wealth of experiences we have
gained as the status of the body rose from innocent
childhood to matured old age.
Using this subjective experience of every one in the world
as a standard of comparison, Krishna is trying to bring
home to Arjuna that wise men do not worry when they
leave one body for the purpose of taking another one.
This stanza is again asserting, in unequivocal terms, the
truth behind the Reincarnation Theory. And thus viewed,
death can no more be a threat to a wise man. We do not
moan at the death of childhood following which alone can
72

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

we come to experience youth; we are confident in our
knowledge that though youth is entered into and
childhood has ended, there is a continuity of existence of
the same one only, so, a child has now become a youth. So
too, at the moment of death, there is no extinction of the
individuality, but the embodied-ego of the dead-body
leaves its previous structure, and according to the vasanas
(mental impressions) that it had gathered during its
embodiment, it gets identified with a physical equipment,
where it can express itself completely, and seek its perfect
fulfilment.
14. The contacts of senses with objects, O son of Kunti, which
cause heat and cold, pleasure and pain, have a beginning and an
end; they are impermanent; endure them bravely, O descendant
of Bharata.
According to the accepted theory of perception in Vedanta,
an object is perceived not BY the sense-organs but
THROUGH them. The Indriyas are instruments through
which the perceiving-ego gathers the knowledge of the
various objects. If the perceiver is not actually contacting
the objects through the sense-organs, the objects, as such,
cannot bring any perception to him.
That the same objects can give two different types of
experiences to two different individuals is very wellknown. The object remaining the same, if it can give
different experiences, it is evident that it is because of the
difference in the mental composition of the individuals. It
73

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

is also observed that, objects of one's intense fancy during
a certain stage in one's life, become a nuisance to the same
individual after a time; for, as time passes on, the mental
constitution of the individual also changes. In short, it is
very clear that the external objects can convey their stimuli
and give us an experience only when our minds come in
contact with the objects through the sense-organs.
He who can understand that the objects of the world are
in a state of flux, are constantly coming into existence and
perishing --- he will not allow himself to be tossed about
by the existence or non-existence of the finite things of the
world. In the flood of time, things and incidents,
circumstances and environments flow up to our present
from the unknown FUTURE, to give us vivid experiences
of varied intensity, and they, in their very nature, cannot
remain permanently, but must, of necessity, pass on to
become one with the entire PAST. Nothing can remain the
same, even for a short period, in the world-of-objects
where change alone is the changeless law.
Having understood this finite nature of the changeable
objects-of-the-world, wherein everyone of them has a
beginning and an end, on no occasion need a wise man
despair the least, of things THAT ARE, or of things THAT
ARE NOT. Heat and cold, success or failure, pain or joy --none of them can be permanent.
Since every situation, of its own nature, must keep on
changing, it would be foolish to get ourselves upset at
74

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

every change noticed. It is wisdom to suffer them meekly
with the comfort and consolation of the knowledge of
their finite nature. It is the attitude of the wise to go
through life, both in joy and sorrow, in success and
failure, in pain and joy, with the constant awareness:
"Even this will pass away."
The external world of challenges is finite inasmuch as it
has a beginning and an end. Not only that, Krishna adds,
"they are impermanent by their very nature." By the term
'impermanent' used here, the Lord means that the same
object which gives pleasure at one moment starts yielding,
at another moment, pain to the experiencer. This
inconsistency is indicated by the term 'anitya' in the
stanza.
WHAT GOOD WILL ACCRUE TO HIM WHO IS
INDIFFERENT TO HEAT AND COLD AND THE LIKE? -- LISTEN:
15. That firm man whom, surely, these afflict not, O chief
among men, to whom pleasure and pain are the same, is fit for
realising the Immortality of the Self.
Calm endurance, both in pleasure and pain, is a condition
necessary for right knowledge of the true Self; this is the
technique of Self-realisation, as explained in the
Upanishadic lore. Based upon that fact, here Lord Krishna
explains that one who has found in himself a mental
equipoise, wherein he is not afflicted or disturbed by
75

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

circumstances of pain and pleasure, he alone "IS FIT FOR
ATTAINING IMMORTALITY."
When the TRANSCENDENTAL TRUTH or the ETERNAL
PERFECTION has been indicated by the term
Immortality, the term is not used in its limited sense of
'deathlessness' of the body. Here the term 'death' not only
indicates the destruction of the physical embodiment but
also includes and incorporates within its significance, the
entire range of finite experiences, where, in each one of
them, there is an extinction-experience. No experience
gained through either the body, or the mind, or the
intellect is permanent.
In other words, each experience is born to live with us for
a short period and then to die away in us. These chains of
finite experiences stretch out in front of us as the paths of
sorrow and pain in our life. The term 'Immortality,' used
by the Rishi to indicate the 'Supermanhood,' indicates a
state wherein one, walking the path of endless sorrows, as
the individual ego, transcends that state to attain the
Infinite experience of THE ETERNAL AND THE
PERMANENT.
Through the Geeta, our poet-seer Vyasa is making Lord
Krishna declare that the purpose of life for every one is the
attainment of PERFECTION, and to evolve oneself to it
one must make use of every little chance in one's allotted
span of life. To endure meekly, with magnanimous joy,
the little pin-pricks of life --- heat and cold, success and
76

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

failure, pain and joy --- is the highest training that life can
provide to all of us.
An incompetent idler's hapless endurance of life, is not in
itself what is indicated here. It is especially said that the
equipoise of the mind, both in pleasure and sorrow,
entertain by a "wise man" (Dheerah) makes him fit for the
highest cultural self-development. That is to say, the
equanimity should not flow from the dark caves of one's
stupidity and inertia, but it must gurgle forth from the
open sunny fields of wisdom and understanding. When
one understands the essential nature of the objects-of-theworld to be finite, out of that realised knowledge one
gains enough balance for calm endurance and does not
feel exalted in pleasure nor dejected in pain.
So long as we live in the body, as the body, we are not
able to ignore or calmly endure the sorrows of the body.
But, when we are fired by a sentiment of love or hatred,
we invariably make ready sacrifices of bodily pleasures.
Because of my love for my son, I am ready to make any
sacrifice of my physical needs, so that I may give him a
good education, etc. When, intellectually, one gets fired by
some idea or ideology, for the satisfaction of it, one readily
ignores and overlooks the comforts and pleasures of one's
body and mind. The martyrs and revolutionaries in the
world could, with pleasure, face physical persecutions and
mental agonies for the satisfaction of their intellectual
lives and for the fulfilment of their ideals and ideologies.
77

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, IT IS PROPER
THAT YOU SHOULD ABANDON YOUR GRIEF AND
DISTRESSING DELUSION AND SHOULD CALMLY
ENDURE HEAT AND COLD, ETC. FOR:
16. The unreal has no being; there is no non-being of the Real;
the truth about both these has been seen by the Knowers of the
Truth (or the Seers of the Essence) .
In Vedantic literature, the Real and the Un-real are very
scientifically distinguished. These two categories are not
considered as indefinables in our ancient scriptures;
though they do not declare these to be definables. The
Rishis have clearly indicated what constitutes the REAL
and what are the features of the UN-REAL. "That which
was not in the past and which will not be in the future,
but, that which seemingly exists only in the present is
called the un-Real." In the language of the Karika, "That
which is non-existent in the beginning and in the end, is
necessarily non-existent in the intermediate stages also;
objects, we see, are illusory, still they are regarded as real."
Naturally, the Real is "that which defies all changes and
remains the same in all the periods of time: past, present
and future." Thus, in an ordinary example, when one
misunderstands a post in the dark to be a ghost, the ghostvision is considered unreal as compared to the post;
because, the hallucination cannot be permanent and it
does not remain after the re-discovery of the post.
Similarly, on waking up from our dream, we do not get
78

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

anxious to provide for our dream-children; because, as
soon as we wake up, we realise that the dream was unreal.
Before we went to bed, the dream-children were not with
us, and after waking up, our dream-children are no more
with us; thus we understand and realise that our dreamchildren, whom we loved and tended as real during our
dream, are, in fact, unreal. By significance, therefore, the
Real is that which exists at all times: in the past, the
present and the future. The post is relatively real --- it was,
it is and it will be.
The life in our matter envelopments, we know, is finite,
inasmuch as every little experience, at all the three levels
of our existence --- among the objects, with our
sentiments, in the company of our ideas --- in finite. The
body changes at every moment; the mind evolves and the
intellect grows. All changes, evolutionary movements and
growths, are indicated by a constant-death of their
previous state, in order that the thing concerned may
change, evolve or grow. The body, the mind and the
intellect are ever-changing in us, and all of them,
therefore, according to our definition, cannot be Real.
But is there a Real entity behind it all? In order that
change may take place, no doubt, a changeless substratum
is necessary. For the waters of the river to flow, a
motionless river-bed must exist. Similarly, in order to hold
together the millions of experiences at the levels of our
body, mind and intellect, and to give us the experience of
a synchronised whole --- which we call life --- we must,
79

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

necessarily, have some substratum, changeless and real,
which is common to all three.
Something in us remains, as it were, unchanged all
through our changes, holding the vivid experiences
together as a thread holds the beads in a necklace. On
closer analysis, it becomes clear that it can be nothing
other than the Self in us, the Pure Awareness. Experiences
that have come under one's awareness do not constitute
any vital aspect of one's own Self; life is the sum total of
experiences that have been devised by the touch of one's
illuminating Consciousness. In childhood, I was conscious
of my childhood-life; in my youth, I was conscious of my
youthful life; and in my old age, I am again conscious of
my present experiences. The Consciousness remaining the
same, endless experiences came under it, got illumined
and died away. This Awareness by which I become
conscious of things in my life --- because of which I am
considered as alive, but for which I will have no more
existence in this given embodiment --- "That" Spiritual
Entity, Eternal and All-Pervading, Unborn and Undying,
the One Changeless Factor, is the Infinite in me. And this
Atman is the Real.
Men of knowledge and wisdom have known the essence,
the meaning and the implication of both these: the Self
and the non-Self, the Real and the Unreal, which in their
mysterious
combination
constitute
the
strange
phenomenon called the world.
80

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHAT THEN IS THAT WHICH IS EVER REAL? LISTEN:
17. Know That to be Indestructible by which all this is pervaded.
None can cause the destruction of That --- the Imperishable.
The REAL is that which envelops everything that exists,
and which is the very stuff and substance of all the worlds
of perceptions, which we experience. Different mud-pots,
each different in form, shape and colour, may have
different names according to the things they contain or
according to the purpose for which they are used. Though
each of them has thus a different name, yet, all of them
are, we may say, enveloped by --- or permeated with one
and the same stuff, the mud, without which none of the
pots can exist. From mud they came; in mud they exist;
and when they are destroyed, their names and forms shall
merge back to become mud. All the mud-pots are
enveloped by mud which is the Reality holding the world
of mud-pots together.
Similarly, the world of finite changes is entirely permeated
through and through and enveloped by the REAL, the
Changeless. And Bhagawan adds that there is no
possibility of this REAL, even for a moment, ever getting
destroyed, even by a fraction.
WHAT THEN IS THE UNREAL (ASAT) WHOSE
EXISTENCE IS NOT CONSTANT? LISTEN:

81

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

18. They have an end, it is said, these bodies of the embodiedSelf. The Self is Eternal, Indestructible, Incomprehensible.
Therefore, fight, O Bharata.
The physical forms, constituted of matter envelopments,
are all perishable equipments for the indwelling-Self,
which is the Eternal Factor, ever in Its nature, changeless,
indestructible, and incomprehensible. By the term EVER
CHANGELESS, the Supreme is indicated as Eternal
because the non-eternals, by their nature, must be everchanging, change being the insignia of the finite. Here, by
using the two terms: Eternal (Nityah) and Indestructible
(Anashinah), the Lord is indicating that neither a total nor a
partial destruction is possible in the Supreme.
By qualifying the Eternal as UNKNOWABLE it is not, in
any sense, intended to indicate that the Supreme is
'unknown.' Here, the term 'unknowable' is only meant to
express that it is not knowable through the usual organsof-perception. The sense-organs are the instruments
through which the Consciousness beams out and in ITS
awareness, objects get illumined. These instruments of
cognition, whether they be sense-organs, or the mind or
the intellect, are in themselves, inert and can have their
knowledge of perception only when they are dynamised
by the Consciousness, the Spark-of-Life. As such, these
organs cannot make the Consciousness an object of their
apprehension. Therefore, in terms of our most common
source of knowledge --- direct perception --- the Shastra
82

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

says here that the Supreme is 'unknowable,' It being selfdetermined (Swatah siddhah).
THEREFORE, FIGHT, O DESCENDANT OF BHARATA -- This is, really, not a command to fight. A religion that is
built upon the concept of extreme forgiveness and largehearted tolerance, as envisaged in the principle of "nonviolence," could not have raised a slogan of chaos or
revolutionary blood-thirstiness in its very scripture. Such
an interpretation is the unintentioned mischief of a
commentator, who does not read the Geeta in the context
of the Mahabharata.
The words "Fight, O Son of India," means that it is a
religious call to every Hindu to discard his defeatist
mentality and face, whole-heartedly and sincerely, the
situations, in every given field of his life, at every given
moment of his existence. Active resistance to evil is the
Krishna-creed in the Geeta.
THE LORD NOW QUOTES TWO VEDIC MANTRAS TO
CONFIRM THE VIEW THAT GEETA SHASTRA IS
INTENDED TO REMOVE THE CAUSE OF SAMSARA,
SUCH AS GRIEF AND DELUSION. "IT IS ONLY A
FALSE NOTION OF YOURS," SAYS THE LORD, "THAT
YOU THINK THUS: 'BHISHMA AND OTHERS, WILL BE
KILLED BY ME IN THE BATTLE; I WILL BE THEIR
SLAYER'..." HOW?

83

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

19. He who takes the Self to be the slayer and he who thinks He
is slain, neither of these knows. He slays not, nor in He slain.
The Self, being Immutable, It is neither slain nor can It be
the slayer. Those who think that they have been slain
when the body is slain and those who feel that they are
the slayers, both of them know not the Real Nature of the
Self and hence they but prattle meaningless assertions.
That which is killed is the perishable body and the
delusory arrogation, "I am slain" belongs to the ego-centre.
The Self is that which is beyond the body and the ego,
since the Pure Consciousness is the Illuminator of both,
the body and the ego. In short, being Immutable, the Self
can neither be the agent nor the object of the action-ofslaying.
HOW IS THE SELF IMMUTABLE? THIS IS ANSWERED
IN THE NEXT VERSE.
20. He is not born, nor does He ever die; after having been, He
again ceases not to be; Unborn, Eternal, Changeless and
Ancient, He is not killed when the body is killed.
This stanza labours to deny in the Self all the symptoms of
mutability that are recognised and experienced by the
body. The body is prone to different changes and these
modifications are the sources of all sorrows in every
embodiment. These six changes are common to all, and
they may be enumerated as: birth, existence, growth,
decay, disease and death. These changes are the common
84

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

womb of all pains in a mortal's life. All these are denied in
the Self, in this stanza, to prove the immutability of the
Self.
Unlike the physical body, the Self is not born, It being the
Eternal Factor that exists at all times. Waves are born and
they die away but the ocean is not born with the waves;
nor does it die away when the waves disappear. Since
there is no birth, there is no death; things that have a
beginning alone can end; the rising waves alone can moan
their dying conditions. Again, it is explained that like the
birth of a child, who was not existing before and who has
come to exist after the birth, the Atman is not something
that has come to be born due to or because of the body.
Thus, the Self is unborn and eternal --- birthless and
deathless (Ajah, Nityah).
HAVING THUS STATED THE PROPOSITION THAT
THE SELF IS NEITHER AN AGENT NOR AN OBJECT
OF THE ACTION OF SLAYING, AND HAVING
ESTABLISHED, BY ARGUMENTS, THE IMMUTABILITY
OF THE SELF, LORD KRISHNA HERE CONCLUDES
THE PROPOSITION AS FOLLOWS:
21. Whosoever knows Him to be Indestructible, Eternal,
Unborn, and Inexhaustible, how can that man slay, O Partha,
or cause others to be slain?
Summarising what is said so far, as the Law of Being
(Dharma) of the Self, which indicated rather than defined
85

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Eternal, Immutable Reality, in this stanza, we have, in
the form of an interrogation, an assertion that those who
know this shall have thereafter, no dejection or sorrow in
facing life's realities.
Having known the Self to be Indestructible, Eternal,
Unborn and Inexhaustible, Krishna asks Arjuna, "How can
one arrogate to oneself the stupid idea of agency?" The
Lord says that neither can such an individual cause
someone to slay nor himself be a slayer. In the context of
the given situation, Krishna advises thus. It is interesting
to note that He means both Himself and Arjuna by His
words. If this knowledge of the Reality has come to the
intellectual appreciation and acceptance of Arjuna, he will
have no more justification to feel himself to be the killer of
the Unborn.
IN WHAT WAY IS THE SELF INDESTRUCTIBLE? HERE,
IN THE FOLLOWING, IS AN EXPLANATORY
EXAMPLE:
22. Just as a man casts off his worn out clothes and puts on new
ones, so also the embodied-Self casts off its worn out bodies and
enters others which are new.
This is one of the oft-quoted famous stanzas in the Geeta
which, by a very striking example, explains to us how the
ego-centric entity in an individual readily leaves its
associations with one set of equipments, and arrogates to
itself another conducive envelopment for living a new set
86

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of its required experiences. The example that Vyasa uses is
so universal that from the Lord's own mouth it rings with
a note of irresistible appeal.
Just as an individual changes his clothes to suit the
convenience of the occasion, so too the ego-centre discards
one physical form and takes to another, which will be
most suited for it to gain the next required type of
experiences. No one will plan to go to his office in his
night-gown, nor will he, in his stiff-collar, feel happy
while playing tennis in the evening. He changes his dress
according to the field where he is intending to work for
the time being. Similar is the why and wherefore of death
and thereafter.
This striking example, which comes within the
comprehension of every one, is made use of by the Lord
so that, not only Arjuna, but even those who are overhearing these eighteen discourses, even at this distant
time, may come to understand the idea clearly.
Changing of our clothes that have become worn out,
cannot be a pain to anyone of us, especially when it is for
the purpose of putting on a new set of clothes. Similarly,
when a mind-intellect-equipment finds that its
embodiment in a given form can no longer help it to earn,
from its available environments, experiences that would
facilitate its evolutionary pilgrimage, it feels that this
particular form is worn out (Jeerna). This "worn out"
condition of a body is to be decided neither by its age nor
87

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

by its biological condition. Nor can anybody other than its
wearer, the ego, decide it.
Critics rise up in hosts, however, against the truth of this
stanza and their main platform of arguments is built upon
the observed facts of young people dying away in the
bloom of their life. In the observers' opinion, the
individual was young and his body was not worn out
(Jeerna), but from the standpoint of the evolutionary
necessity of the ego concerned, that body was already
useless for it. A rich man feels like changing his house or
vehicle almost every year, and he invariably finds ready
purchasers. As far as the rich owner is concerned, the
thing has become useless for him while for the purchaser
it is "as good as new." Similarly, here nobody else can
decide, whether a given body is worn out or not, except its
"wearer."
In short, the stanza emphasizes the doctrine of
reincarnation which we have already explained in an
earlier stanza.
On the whole, it must have definitely conveyed to Arjuna
the idea that death grins only at those who have no
understanding, and that it has no pain for those who
understand its implications and working. Just as changing
the dress is no pain to the body, so too, when the dweller
in the body leaves the envelopment there is no pain
possible; again, undressing does not mean that thereafter
we will ever live naked, so too, the embodied Self, ere
88

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

long, discovers an appropriate equipment from which to
function so as to earn for itself new sets of experiences.
Evolution and change are all for the mind-and-intellect
and not for the Self. The Self is perfect and changeless, and
needs no evolution.
WHY IS THE SELF CHANGELESS? THE LORD SAYS:
23. Weapons cleave It not, fire burns It not, water moistens It
not, wind dries It not.
The unseen is always explained in terms of the seen, and
thereby the unknown becomes fully indicated, rather than
defined; for, any unknown thing merely defined in itself
remains as unknown as before. Similarly, here the
Changeless, Immutable, Self is being described by Lord
Krishna in terms of the mutable and everchanging world
which is very familiar to Arjuna and all people like us. In
the world-of-change, objects come to their annihilation
through instruments of death or they are consumed by
fire or destroyed by water or dried up by air. These are the
various cosmic means and methods by which the objects
of the world come to their destruction. All these means are
declared as impotent in bringing about the destruction of
the Self.
WEAPONS CLEAVE IT NOT --- It is very well-known
that with an axe one can cut down a thing, and with a
bullet one can shoot some other object, but neither can one
wound water, fire, air or space with a sword, however
89

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sharp it might be. The principle is that no instrument can
hit or destroy an element subtler than itself. Naturally,
therefore, Atman, the Self, the very cause of the subtlest
element, space, and necessarily therefore, subtler than
space, cannot be cut asunder by the gross instruments.
FIRE CANNOT BURN IT --- Fire generally can burn
things other than the fire, but it cannot burn itself. The
burning capacity in fire is the very Essence, the Truth in it,
and therefore, fire cannot burn its own Essence, viz., its
fiery nature. Wherever there is fire, it can consume things
only in space and yet, space is never consumed by fire.
Things are consumed by fire in space. If space itself cannot
be consumed by fire, how impotent it must feel when it
tries to consume the cause of space, the Self?
WATER CANNOT MOISTEN IT --- Things get soaked
only when they have got inter-space in themselves. A
piece of bread can be soaked in water or milk, but, a piece
of iron cannot be soaked, as iron has no inter-space in it.
When the substance is one homogeneous mass containing
nothing other than itself to condition it, water cannot enter
the substance and, therefore, cannot soak it. Another
method of destruction observed is either through the
quick effects of water, that is drowning, etc., or through
the slow effects of moisture, such as corroding, etc. Even
these cannot destroy the Truth.
WIND DRIES IT NOT --- Dehydration is possible only
when there are some traces of water in the substance
90

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dehydrated. Every crystal has its own water of
crystallisation, which, when removed, causes the crystals
to lose their distinct shapes and forms and get pulverised
into a fine powder. These are days when vegetables and
food materials are dehydrated for purposes of
preservation. This is possible because these substances
contain moisture-molecules within them. The Supreme
Consciousness contains nothing other than Itself and
therefore, annihilation through the process of dehydration
is not possible.
Apart from this direct word-meaning, on the whole, the
stanza indicates deeper significances which are better
brought out in the next stanza, where Lord Krishna gives
out how and why the truth is Eternal.
FOR WHAT REASON? WHY AND HOW CAN WE
RECOGNISE THE SELF TO BE ETERNAL?
24. This Self cannot be cut, nor burnt, nor moistened, nor dried
up. It is eternal, all-pervading, stable immovable and ancient.
It is amply clear that if a thing cannot be annihilated by
any of the known methods of destruction of nature, or
those invented and perfected by man, then that given
object must be everlasting.
Here, in the second line, we have a series of qualities
listed, indicating the Truth; they are not a haphazard
collection of terms picked up at random and used in haste.
91

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Each word is chosen as a sequence to the previous one.
That which has indestructibility, as indicated in the first
line, should necessarily be everlasting (Nityah). That
which is thus Eternal must be necessarily All-Pervading
(Sarvagatah).
"ALL-PERVADING" is a short term of inconceivable
depth of significance. ALL-PERVADING is that which
pervades everywhere and, therefore, there is nothing that
is not pervaded by the "ALL-PERVASIVE." The Eternal
truth envelops all, and the ALL-PERVADING has no
shape, since that which has a shape is conditioned all
along its outline by something other than itself.
A man with a head, a trunk and limbs has a shape,
because all around him, along his outline, is space, which
is something other than the carbon-material of his skull
and bones. A thing conditioned should necessarily have a
form of its own. By the term "ALL-PERVADING," it is
meant that it has only Itself all round It and at all places,
and that It is unconditioned by anything other than Itself.
A truth that is thus Eternal (Nityah), Homogeneous and
All-Pervading (Sarvagatah) must necessarily be "Stable"
(Sthanuh) because no change can ever take place in it. That
which is thus Stable must be "Firm" (Achalah); for, it
cannot shake or move, since movement implies the
transfer of a thing from one set of time and place to
another set of time and place where it was not. Since the
Self is All-pervading, there is no spot in space, or period in
92

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

time, where It is not already, and therefore --- just as I
cannot move myself in myself --- the Self cannot move
anywhere. A motionless thing is indeed "Firm" (Achalah).
Here the two terms "Stable" (Sthanuh) and "Firm" (Achalah)
may seem to be a tautology: both having almost the same
meaning. But the former means stability at the base, as in
the case of a banyan-tree. At the base of the trunk it is
stable and yet at the top it is moving. Truth is 'stable' at
the 'base' and 'firm' at the 'top'. In Its Infinite glory, It has
no movement anywhere.
Sanatanah --- that which is ancient. The implication of this
term can fall under two categories: the obvious and the
suggestive. The OBVIOUS meaning indicates that the Self
is not new (Nutanah) but it is ancient and, therefore, we, as
students of Brahma-Vidya, need not hesitate to accept it, as
we necessarily would if the theory were a modern
ideology which was yet to be verified by observed
experimental data. In its suggestiveness, the term
Sanatanah implies that the Self is unconditioned by time
and place. Perfection gained, whether it be in India, or at
the North Pole, in the present generation, or in the chaste
periods of the Vedic culture, in all places and at all times,
by all seers, in all the religions of the world, the Selfexperience at the time of God-realisation, can only be one
and the same.
MOREOVER, BHAGAWAN ADDS:
93

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

25. This (Self) is said to be Unmanifest, Unthinkable and
Unchangeable. Therefore, knowing This to be such, you should
not grieve.
This Eternal, All-Pervading Self is certainly Unmanifest,
Unthinkable, and Unchangeable, and therefore, having
known this truth in Its essential nature, Krishna argues
that it is neither possible to kill nor to get really killed.
Each of these terms is quite expressive of certain logical
truths.
UNMANIFEST --- The five Great Elements that we know,
when they become subtler, they lose their capacity to
impinge themselves upon our sense perceptions:
considered from 'Earth' to 'Air,' we find the elements
progressively getting subtler for our perceptions and
finally 'Ether' or 'Space,' by itself, cannot be perceived
directly by our senses at all. However, the five Great
Elements can, to some extent, be perceived through our
sense-organs. But the CAUSE of 'Ether, ' the subtlest of the
Five Elements, is too subtle for our perception, and
therefore we will have to assume that it is Unmanifest.
A thing is called manifest when we can perceive it
through one or the other of our sense-organs. That which
is beyond all five sense-organs is called Unmanifest. I
cannot see, smell, hear, taste or touch a full-grown mango
tree in a mango seed, and yet, I know that the seed is the
cause for the tree. Under the circumstances, the tree is said
to be in an 'unmanifest' condition in the seed. Similarly,
94

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

when they say that truth is Unmanifest, they only mean
that It cannot be perceived through any of our senseorgans. In the Upanishads, we have exhaustive
explanations of why our senses cannot have the Eternal as
an object of sense-perceptions. It is the very subject
because of which the sense-organs can perceive.
UNTHINKABLE --- After denying the sense-organs any
play in the field of Truth, we are told that the human mind
also cannot think, nor can the human intellect ruminate
over and comprehend the Infinite. The Self being the very
life that energises the mind and the intellect, which by
themselves are inert and insentient, it becomes obvious
that the mind and intellect cannot make the Self an object
of their comprehension. A telescope-gazer cannot see
himself with his telescope; he cannot be at once the seer
and the seen. Thus here, the Lord's word "Unthinkable" is
to be understood as meaning 'Incomprehensible' by the
mind and the intellect of the seeker.
UNCHANGEABLE --- This term indicates that the Self is
without parts because things that have parts in themselves
are things which have "form," and those that have "form"
must necessarily come under the category of the FINITE
and exhibit in themselves various modifications and
changes.
By these terms, Truth is declared as Immutable,
Unmanifest, Unthinkable and Unchangeable.
95

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Krishna thus advises Arjuna to end his grief. He who
understands the Eternal nature of the Self can have neither
the occasion to perceive himself as the slayer nor
recognise others as the slain.
GRANTING THAT THE SELF IS NOT EVER-LASTING,
THE LORD PROCEEDS TO GIVE THE MATERIALISTS'
POINT-OF-VIEW:
26. But even if you think of Him as being constantly born and
constantly dying, even then, O mighty-armed, you should not
grieve.
This and the following stanzas are arguments in which the
materialists' point-of-view has been, for the purpose of
argument, presented here by Krishna. According to them,
direct perception alone is an authority for belief. With this
standard for their knowledge, when they try to measure
life, they have to accept it as a constant flux of infinitebirths and infinite-deaths. Things are born; and they die
away. This whirl-of-birth-and-death is constant. And "this
constant change" is life to them. Krishna argues that, if life
is but a constant repetition of births and deaths, then also,
the hero (Mahabahu) that you are, you do not deserve to
grieve on this occasion.
ACCORDINGLY:
27. Indeed, certain is death for the born, and certain is birth for
the dead; therefore, over the inevitable, you should not grieve.
96

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

That which is born must die and after death things are
born again. Here, Krishna continues to view the whole
situation from the materialist angle. The materialists take
life to be a constant flood of appearances of forms, arising
from nowhere, and disappearing into nowhere. The
theists believe that the embodiments are taken up by the
individual-ego in order that it may eke out its experiences
and learn to grow in its understanding of life and
ultimately realise the Truth behind it all. Thus, this is a
comon meeting point of both the theists and the atheists;
that both of them believe life to be a continuous chain of
birth and death.
Thus, if life, be, in its very nature, a stream of births and
deaths, against this inevitable arrangement, no intelligent
man should moan. Standing out in the blazing summer
sun, one must, indeed, be stupid to complain against its
heat and glare. Similarly, having come to life, to complain
against the very nature of life is, indeed, an inexcusable
stupidity.
On this score also, to weep is to admit one's own
ignorance. Krishna's life, is, on the whole, a message of
cheer and joy. His doctrine of life is an insistence upon, "to
weep is folly and to smile is wisdom." "Keep smiling"
seems to be Krishna's philosophy put in two words, and
that is why, seeing his dear friend weeping in life, the
Lord gets whipped up, as it were, to an enthusiasm to
save Arjuna from his delusions, and bring him back to the
true purpose of life.
97

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE FOLLOWING TEN VERSES GIVE THE COMMONMAN'S VIEW. SHANKARA SAYS, "NEITHER IS IT
PROPER TO GRIEVE OVER BEINGS WHICH ARE MERE
COMBINATIONS OF (MATERIAL) CAUSES AND
EFFECTS; FOR":
28. Beings unmanifest in the beginning, and unmanifest again
in their end seem to be manifest in the middle, O Bharata. What
then is there to grieve about?
From this stanza onwards we have a beautiful
presentation of the whole problem of Arjuna from the
stand-point of the man-of-the-world. In these ten verses
Krishna explains the problem as viewed through the
goggles of a common man of the world and valued by his
intellectual judgement.
The material world of objects strictly follows the law of
causation. The world of "effects" rises from the world of
"causes." In a majority of cases, the effects are manifest
and the causes are unmanifest. 'To project from the
unmanifest to the manifest' is the programme of creation
of a thing, strictly following the Law of Causation.
Thus, the manifest-world of today was unmanifest before
its creation; and now for the time being, it is available for
cognition as fully manifest, only to fade away soon into
the unmanifest again. It amounts to saying that the
present came from the UNKNOWN and shall return to
the UNKNOWN. Even if viewed thus, why should one
98

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

moan; for, the spokes of a wheel that turns eternally must
COME DOWN only to RISE UP again.
Again, the dream-children, unmanifest before, and which
came to manifestation during the dream, become
unmanifest again on waking up. Why moan, you
bachelor, for a wife whom you had never married, who
had disappeared with your dream, the children unborn,
who dissolved away with your dream?
If there be, as Krishna says, an Infinite, Eternal, Truth
which is Changeless and Deathless, in which alone this
drama of change occurs, this whirl-of-birth-and-death
spins, how is it that we are not able to realise It even
though it is explained to us repeatedly? According to
Shankara, Lord Krishna here feels that He should not
blame Arjuna for his incapacity to understand the Self.
SHANKARA SAYS, "THE SELF JUST SPOKEN OF IS
VERY DIFFICULT TO REALISE. WHY SHOULD I
BLAME YOU ALONE, WHILE THE CAUSE,
IGNORANCE, IS COMMON TO ALL?" ONE MAY ASK:
HOW IS IT THAT THE SELF IS SO DIFFICULT TO
REALISE? THE LORD SAYS:
29. One sees This as a wonder; another speaks of This as a
wonder; another hears of This as a wonder; yet, having heard
none understands This at all!

99

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Eternal Absolute is explained to us as Infinite, Allknowing and All-blissful. Our experience of ourselves is
that we are finite, ignorant and miserable. Thus, between
the Reality, which is our Self, and what we experience
ourselves to be, there seems to be as much difference as
between heat and cold, light and darkness. Why is it that
we are not able to recognise the Self, which is our Real
Nature?
In our ignorance, when we try to perceive the Truth, it
seems to be a goal to be reached at some distant place, in a
distant period of time. But in fact, if we are to believe the
Lord's words, the Self being our essential nature, we are
never far from It. A mortal is as far away from
Immortality --- the sinner is as far removed from a Saint --the imperfect is as far removed from Perfection --- as a
dreamer is from the waker.
Man awakened to the Self's Glory is God; God forgetful of
His own glory is the deluded man!
To the ego, the very existence of the subtler Self beyond
the body, mind and intellect is an idea that cannot even be
conceived of, and, when a mortal, through the techniques
of self-perfection, comes to recognise himself to be the
Self, he is struck with a wondrous ecstasy of that suprasensuous experience.
The emotion of wonder, when it rises in the mind, has the
capacity to black-out, for the time being, all cognitions,
100

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and the individual who has been struck with wonder,
forgets himself and becomes, for the moment, one with
the very emotion. As an experiment, try to completely
surprise somebody, and quietly watch his attitude. With
mouth open and his unseeing eyes protruding out, every
nerve in him stretched to the highest tension, the victimof-wonderment stands fixed to the spot as a statue carved
in moist, cold, flesh. The same is the thrilled hush of lived
joy in the Temple of Experience, when the Self, all alone
with the Self, comes to live as the Self. And, therefore, the
great Rishis of old borrowed the term 'wonderment' to
indicate to the student what exactly would be the
condition of his personality layers at the moment when
his ego drops off from the resplendent Infinite Form of the
Self.
True knowledge makes a man realise that he is "The Soul
with a body," but now in his ignorance, he thinks that he
is a "body with a soul." Those who LISTEN well are
encouraged to REFLECT on what they have heard and to
MEDITATE until they realise the Self. The unintelligent
listeners also feel encouraged, by the very same statement
expressing the rarity of this knowledge, to make repeated
attempts at listening (shravana), continuous reflection
(manana) and long contemplation (nididhyasana).
HERE THE LORD CONCLUDES THE SUBJECT OF THIS
SECTION, THUS:

101

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

30. This, the Indweller in the body of everyone is ever
indestructible, O Bharata; and, therefore, you should not grieve
for any creature.
The subtle Reality in each body, the indwelling Spirit in
every creature is Eternal and Indestructible. All that is
destroyed is only the container, the finite matter
envelopment. Therefore, Arjuna has been advised that he
should not grieve at facing his enemies and in the great
battle, even killing them, if need be. To bring out this idea,
the entire earlier section has been used by Krishna
wherein he argued so well to establish the Eternal nature
of the soul and the finite nature of the bodies. Shankara
rightly concludes that this stanza winds up the entire
section opened in verse 11.
HERE IN THIS VERSE, IT HAS BEEN SHOWN THAT
FROM THE STANDPOINT OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH,
THERE IS NO OCCASION FOR GRIEF AND
ATTACHMENT. NOT ONLY FROM THE STANDPOINT
OF ABSOLUTE TRUTH, BUT ALSO:
31. Further, looking at thine own duty thou oughtest not to
waver, for there is nothing higher for a KSHATRIYA than a
righteous war.
Arjuna's personal call-of-character (Swadharma) is that of a
leader of his generation (Kshatriya) and as such, when his
generation is called upon to answer a challenge of an
102

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

organised un-Aryan force (Adharma), it is his duty not to
waver but to fight and defend his sacred national culture.
To the leaders of people, there can be nothing nobler than
to get a glorious chance to fight for a righteous cause.
Here Arjuna has been called upon to fight a righteous war
wherein his enemies are the true aggressors. Therefore, it
is said that such a chance comes, indeed, only to a lucky
few. That a king must fight on such an occasion is vividly
brought out in the Mahabharata.
AND REGARDING OTHER REASONS WHY THE
BATTLE SHOULD BE FOUGHT, THE LORD SAYS:
32. Happy indeed are the KSHATRIYAS, O Partha, who are
called to fight in such a battle, that comes of itself as an opendoor to heaven.
As used here, Kshatriya is not the name of a caste. It
merely indicates a certain quality of the mental vasanas in
the individual. Those who have an ever-bubbling
enthusiasm to defend the weak and the poor, besides their
own national culture from all threats of aggression, are
called Kshatriyas. Such leaders of men are not allowed to
be tyrants and aggressors themselves, according to the
code of morality of the Hindus. But, at the same time, a
cold, feminine and cowardly non-resistance is not the
spirit of the Hindu tradition. In all cases where the Hindu
nation is forced to wage a war on principles of
righteousness (Upapannam) the leaders of India are
103

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ordered to fight in defence of their culture and to consider
themselves fortunate to get the chance to serve the
country. Such battle-fields are the wide-open gates to
Heaven for the defending heroes who fight diligently on
the side of Dharma.
It is interesting to note how Lord Krishna, in the scheme
of his exhortations, comes down slowly from the highest
pinnacles of Vedantic ideologies to the lower plane of
material philosophy, and still lower down to the point-ofview of an average worldly man. From all these different
levels, he views the problem and presents Arjuna with the
same logical conclusion that the war must be fought.
IT IS INDEED A FACT THAT IT IS YOUR DUTY, AND
NOW IN CASE YOU RENOUNCE IT AND RUN AWAY
FROM THE BATTLE-FIELD, THEN:
33. But, if you will not fight this righteous war, then, having
abandoned your own duty and fame, you shall incur sin.
In case you refuse to engage yourself in this glorious war,
then not only will you be renouncing your own "personal
call-of-character" (Swadharma) and honour, in not having
fulfilled your noble duty, but also incur positive sin. Not
to face this army of un-Aryan forces is as much sinful as to
murder and kill those who deserve not such a treatment.

104

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Dharma, we have already explained, is the 'law of being.'
Every living creature has taken up its form and has come
into the world of objects for one great purpose, which is to
gain an exhaustion of its existing mental impressions. The
bundle of vasanas with which an individual has arrived
into a particular incarnation is called his, "personal call-ofcharacter" (Swadharma). When classified thus, Arjuna falls
under the group of the 'kingly' (Kshatriya), who are
characterised by adventurous heroism and an insatiable
thirst for honour and fame.
Not to make use of the evolutionary chances provided by
life is to reject and refuse the chances provided for a
vasana CATHARSIS. By not exhausting the old vasanas,
one will be living under a high vasana-pressure when the
existing tendencies are crowded out by the influx of new
tendencies. Not fighting the war, Arjuna may run away
from the field, but he will certainly come to regret his lost
chances, since his mind is so composed that he can find
complete relief and solace only by living the intensely
dangerous life of the battle-field. A boy with tendencies
for art cannot be successfully trained to become a
businessman, or an economist, since these are contrary to
his nature. If an over-anxious parent, in the name of love,
projects upon a growing child, his own intentions and
plans, we invariably find that the young boy will have a
crushed personality.
Examples of this type are seen everywhere in the world,
especially so in the spiritual field. There are many seekers
105

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

with over-enthusiasm for spiritual development, who, at
the mere appearance of a misery, or at the threat of a
sorrow, decide to run away into the jungles 'seeking God,'
and they, invariably, end in a life-long tragic disaster.
They have in them sensuous vasanas which can be
satisfied only in the embrace of a family under the roof of
their own tenement, but rejecting them all, they reach the
Himalayan caves and then, all the day through, they can
neither meditate upon the Lord, nor find a field for
sensuous enjoyment. Naturally, they entertain more and
more agitations in their minds, otherwise called sin (papa).
Sin in Hinduism is "a mistake of the mind in which it acts
contrary to its essential nature as the Self." Any act of
sensuousness which the mind pants for in the world-ofobjects, hoping to get thereby a joy and satisfaction,
creates necessarily within itself more and more agitations
and this type of a mistake of the mind is called a sin.
CONTINUING, NOT ONLY WILL YOU HAVE GIVEN
UP YOUR DUTY AND FAME BUT ALSO:
34. People too, will recount your everlasting dishonour; and to
one who has been honoured, dishonour is more than death.
To a famous hero, dishonour is worse than death. This is
another argument that Krishna brings forth, to persuade
his friend to give up his hesitation in fighting the great
war. The general import is that, if Arjuna were to abandon
106

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the fight, he could do so only because of his cowardice,
since, the cause of the war is righteous. Certainly, there is
an under-current of sympathy in Krishna's words: he
realises that, however great a hero Arjuna might be, even
he could be weakened by wrong emotionalism.
MOREOVER:
35. The great battalion commanders will think that you have
withdrawn from the battle through fear; and you will be looked
down upon by them who had thought much of you and your
heroism in the past.
Continuing the common-man's-point-of-view arguments,
Krishna says here that not only will the world blame him
and history recount his infamy, but immediately also, the
great warriors and battalion commanders (Maharathas) in
the enemy lines will start ridiculing him. They will laugh
and say that the great archer Arjuna ran away from the
battle-front because of sheer cowardice. They will
interpret his conscientious objections against the
fratricidal war as an act of cowardice of a hero during a
weak moment in his life. No soldier can stand such a
dishonour, especially when it comes from one's own
equals among enemy lines.
MOREOVER:

107

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

36. And many unspeakable words will your enemies speak
cavilling about your powers. What can be more painful than
this?
Finding that Arjuna is conspicuously reacting well to
these arguments, Krishna drives home to him the folly of
running away from the battle-front. It will be intolerable
when his enemies scandalize his glorious name and his
chivalry in foul language, too indecent even for words.
Not only will history record for all times his cowardly
retreat but even while he lives, he will be pointed out and
laughed at as a 'hero' who ran away from the battle-field.
37. Slain, you will obtain heaven; victorious you will enjoy the
earth; therefore, stand up, O son of Kunti, determined to fight.
In case he has to give up his life on the war-front, fighting
for such a noble cause, he shall, certainly, enter the
'Heaven of the Heroes' (Veera-swarga) to stay and to enjoy
there for aeons. In case he wins, he shall certainly come to
rule over the kingdom and enjoy in the world, and
thereafter also he shall go to Heaven to enjoy there the
status of a mighty hero who fought championing the
cause of Dharma. Either way he will gain because he was
on the side of the good --- the war aims of the Pandavas
being stoutly righteous.
Therefore --- meaning, for all the reasons so far
enumerated, "Arise, resolved to fight." Earlier, Arjuna,
after expressing his feelings of grief and despair had sat
108

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

inert and motionless throwing down his weapons.
Krishna asks his friend to come out of this moodiness and
dejection, "determined to fight" the noble war.
The call to war is justified because of the particular
situation in the Mahabharata where the Geeta was given
out. Generalising the call of Krishna, we may say that it is
a divine call to Man to discard his melancholy dejections
in the face of life's challenges and to come forward to play
as best as he can "the game of life" with a firm
determination to strive and to win. In this line, we have
the universality of the Geeta explicitly brought out for
those who understand it and find its vast application to
the community of man.
NOW LISTEN TO THE ADVICE I OFFER YOU ON
YOUR INNER ATTITUDE WHILE YOU FIGHT THE
BATTLE:
38. Having made --- pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory
and defeat --- the same, engage in battle for the sake of battle;
thus you shall not incur sin.
From this stanza onwards we have a slight hint about the
technique of Karma Yoga as explained in the Geeta. In the
introduction we have stated that the second chapter is
almost a summary of the whole Geeta; later on, we shall
see how the Path of Devotion also is, in brief, indicated in
this very chapter.
109

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In this stanza we have Krishna's first direct statement on
the technique of Self-Perfection and, as such, a very
careful study of it will be extremely fruitful to all students
of the Geeta.
The three pairs of opposites mentioned here are distinct
experiences at the three levels of our mortal existence.
PAIN AND PLEASURE are the "intellectual" awareness of
experiences unfavourable and favourable; GAIN AND
LOSS conceptions indicate the "mental" zone where we
feel the joys of meeting and the sorrows of parting; and
CONQUEST AND DEFEAT indicate the "physical" fields
wherein at the level of the body, we ourselves win or let
others win. The advice that Krishna gives is that one must
learn to keep oneself in equilibrium in all these different
vicissitudes at the respective levels of existence.
If one were to enter the sea for a bath, one must know the
art of sea-bathing or else the incessant waves will play
rough on the person, and may even sweep him off his feet
and drag him to a watery grave. But he who knows the art
of saving himself --- by ducking beneath the mighty
waves, or by riding over the lesser ones --- he alone can
enjoy a sea-bath. To hope all the waves to end, or to expect
the waves not to trouble one while one is in the sea is to
order the sea to be something other than itself for one's
convenience! This is exactly what a foolish man does in
life. He expects life to be without waves --- but life is ever
full of waves. Pain and pleasure, gain and loss, conquest
110

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and defeat must arise in the waters of life or else it is
complete stagnation --- it is almost death.
If life be thus a tossing stormy sea at all times, and it
should be so, then we, who have entered life, must know
the art of living it, unaffected either by the rising crests, or
by the sinking hollows in it. To identify ourselves with
any of them is to be tossed about on the surface, and not to
stand astride like a light-house, which has its foundations
built on the bed-rock of the very sea. Here Krishna advises
Arjuna, while inviting him to fight, that he should enter
the contest and keep himself unaffected by the usual
dissipasting mental tendencies that come to everyone,
while in activity. This equanimity of the mind alone can
bring out the beam of inspiration, and give to one's
achievements the glow of a real success.
It is very well-known that in all activities, inspired work
gathers to itself a texture of divine perfection which
cannot be imitated or oft-repeated. Be he a poet, or an
artist, a doctor or a speaker, irrespective of his profession,
whenever an individual is at his best, his master-piece is
always accepted by all as a 'work of inspiration.' When we
thus work with the thrilled ecstasy of an unknown mood
called 'inspiration,' the ideas, thoughts and activity that
come out of us have a ringing beauty of their own, which
cannot be otherwise mechanically repeated by us. Thus,
Da Vinci could not repeat for a second time and copy on
another piece of canvas the enigmatic smile of his Mona
Lisa; Keats' pen could no more re-capture for a second
111

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

time the song of the Nightingale in its flight; Beethoven
could never again beat out of his faithful piano a second
Moonlight Sonata; Lord Krishna himself, after the war,
when requested by Arjuna to repeat the Geeta, admitted
his inability to do so!!
To the Western mind and understanding, 'inspiration' is
an accidental and mysterious happening over which the
mortal has no control at all, while to the eastern Rishis,
inspired living is the real godly destiny of man, when he
lives in perfect unison with the Self within him. A
balanced life, wherein we live as unaffected witnesses of
even our own mind and intellect, is the realm of selfforgetfulness, where, instead of becoming inefficient, our
profession gathers the scintillating glow of a new dawn.
This extra aura in any achievement is that which raises an
ordinary success to an 'inspired achievement. '
The Yogis of ancient Hindu-lore discovered a technique,
whereby the mind and intellect could be consciously
brought to a steadiness and poise, and this technique is
called Yoga. The Hindus of the Vedic period knew it,
practised it, lived it; and with their incomparable
achievements, they provided, for their country, the golden
era of the Hindus.
The philosophy of a country like India, in the Vedic period,
must necessarily be Theistic, but it has its applications in
all walks of life. If it fails in its all-round application, it
cannot be a philosophy. A theory of life which has no
112

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

universal application, can at best, be appreciated as the
noble opinion of an individual, which may have its own
limited application, but it can never be accepted as a
philosophy.
In the entire scheme of Bhagawan's arguments so far, he
has provided Arjuna with all the necessary reasons which
a healthy intellect should discover for itself, before it
comes to a reliable and dependable judgement upon the
outer happenings. A mere spiritual consideration should
not be the last word in the evaluation of all material
situations. Every challenge should be estimated from the
spiritual stand-point, as well as from the intellectual
stand-point of reason, from the emotional level of ethics
and morality, and from the physical level of tradition and
custom. If all these considerations, without any
contradiction, indicate a solitary truth, then that is surely
the Divine Path that one should, at all costs, pursue.
Arjuna came to the delusory mis-calculation of the
situation because he evaluated the war only from the level
of his sentiments. The opposing forces were teeming with
his own relations and to kill and exterminate them was
indeed against the ethical point-of-view. But, this
emotionalism overpowered him, and at this moment of
his total inward chaos, he completely lost sight of the
other considerations that would have helped him to
regain his balance. He surrendered, as a mind should, to
Krishna, the inner discriminative capacity. Therefore, the
Lord, having undertaken to guide Arjuna, provides him
113

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

with all the available data gathered from different points
of view. Throughout the Geeta, Krishna plays the part of
the "discriminative intellect" in an individual, a true
charioteer in the Upanishad-sense of the term.
After thus placing all the possible points of view upon the
problem --- the spiritual, the intellectual, the ethical and
the traditional for Arjuna's consideration --- Krishna
concludes in the earlier stanza that Arjuna must fight. In
this stanza Krishna tries to explain how he should conduct
himself in this undertaking. It has been said that he should
fight the war with perfect detachment from all anxieties
which generally come to an individual, when he identifies
himself with the non-Self (Anatma) --- at the level of his
intellect with the concept of pain and pleasure, at the level
of his mind with the fears of gain and loss and at his bodylevel with the restlessness of conquest and defeat.
Equanimity in all such mental challenges is a factor that
ensures true success in life. We have explained earlier how
the human mind is to be kept open, while working in its
given field of life, so that, while living in the midst of life's
battle, it can exhaust the vasanas that are already in it. This
purgation --- catharsis of the Soul --- is the compelling
purpose for which every living creature has arrived on the
platform of manifested life. Viewed thus, each individual
living creature --- plant, animal or man --- is but a bundle
of vasanas.

114

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The equanimity in the face of all situations, advised here,
is the secret method of keeping the mind ever open for its
outflow. When it gets clouded by the ego-sense and the
egoistic desires, then the out-flow is choked, and new
tendencies start flooding in. The ego is born when an
individual starts getting upset at all these pairs-ofopposites (Dwandwas) such as joy and sorrow, etc. The
attempt to keep equanimous is successful, only if action is
detached from the ego. Thus, mental purification --vasana-catharsis --- is the benign result of real living and
right action: and this is Yoga. This is explained, in the next
chapter of the Geeta, in all detail as Karma Yoga.
The philosophical theory of truth was described in the
very opening of the Lord's message, and, in order to drive
home those conclusions into the practical-mind of a manof-action, Arjuna, Lord Krishna gave arguments from the
stand-point of the common man. Ultimately, he concluded
that Arjuna must fight and explained in what attitude he
should fight. Practical religion consists in living the
philosophy one has understood.
HEREAFTER, THE SCHEME OF THE GEETA IN THE
CHAPTER IS TO EXPLAIN THE TECHNIQUES OF
LIVING THE VEDANTIC PHILOSOPHY, IN AND
THROUGH KARMA YOGA. HENCE SAYS THE LORD:
39. This, which has been taught to thee, is wisdom concerning
SANKHYA. Now listen to the wisdom concerning YOGA,
115

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

having known which, O Partha, you shall cast off the bonds-ofaction.
What is so far taught consists of the "Sankhya," meaning,
"the logic of reasoning by which the true nature of the
Absolute Reality is comprehended," which can end for
you all sorrows arising from grief, attachment and the
like. Krishna promises that hereafter he will try to explain
the technique of attaining the wisdom (Buddhi), which is
otherwise called Buddhi yoga --- "devotion through work."
FRUITS OF ACTION (Karma-phala) --- The Law-of-Karma,
which is often misunderstood as the Law-of-Destiny,
forms a cardinal creed of the Hindus and a right
understanding of it is absolutely essential to all students
of the Hindu Way-of-Life. If I am, now, justly punished, in
Delhi, for a crime committed last year by Sri Ramana Rao
in Madras then, certainly there must be something
common between the criminal Ramana Rao THEN in
Madras and the saintly Chinmaya NOW in Delhi! The
long arm of the law of the country discovering the identity
of Ramana Rao in Chinmaya must have slowly crept from
Madras to Delhi and ultimately booked the "Swami" for
the crime of Rao, that he was!!
Similarly, nature's justice is always perfect and, therefore,
if the Hindu philosophers accept that each of us
individually suffers because of our crimes committed in
another form, and in a different locality, at a different
period of time in the past, certainly, there must be some
116

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

identity between the SINNER IN THE PAST and the
SUFFERER IN THE PRESENT. This identity, the Shastra
says, is the mind-and-intellect-equipment in each one of
us.
Each act, willfully performed, leaves an impression upon
the mind of the actor according to the texture of the
motive entertained. In order to work out and remove
these impressions --- vasanas-catharsis --- each individual
arrives at his specific field of activity in life. Sinimpressions in the mind can be wiped away only with the
waters of tears, acting upon the mind, in an atmosphere of
sobs and sighs. Thus, every one gets his quota of chances
to weep, which, in many cases, comes to be discovered,
later on, as not so sorrowful, after all. A mind which has
thus been completely purified, fails to see a situation
really worth weeping for. Weeping, in fact, is not ordered
by the circumstances, but by the "papa-tendencies" in the
mind of the miserable.
Merely because there is a record in my gramophone box, I
will have no music. Even when it is placed on its disc and
revolved at the required speed, it will not and cannot sing.
Music can come out of it only when the needle is in
contact with it. The unmanifest music in the disc can be
brought to expression only through the sound-box.
Similarly, here, the mental impressions cannot in
themselves bring either disaster or reward unless they are
connected with the external world through the needlepoint of our ego-centric self-assertion.
117

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

One who lives, as we found in the earlier verse, in perfect
equanimity in all conditions, must necessarily come to live
in a realm of his own, away from the pleasure and pain of
the INTELLECT, the sobs of success and failure of the
MIND, and the fears of loss and gain in the FLESH. To the
degree an individual detaches himself from his own body,
mind and intellect, to that degree his ego is dead, and,
therefore, since the "sufferer" is no longer available, there
cannot be any more "fruits-of-action" for him to suffer.
Rightly understood, we shall realise, during our
discussions on this chapter, how this Theory of Krishna
has not the novelty of an original idea. The more
intimately we understand it, the more we shall realise that
Krishna has but given a new vesture to an ancient idea.
But due to this re-statement in the Geeta, of a cardinal
truth of ancient Hinduism, a religion that was dying
revived itself. And from the days of its origin, five
thousand years before Christ was born, it is beckoning us
today, even two thousand years after the Nazarene's
death.
MOREOVER:
40. In this there is no loss of effort, nor is there any harm
(production of contrary results) . Even a little of this knowledge,
even a little practice of the YOGA, protects one from the great
fear.

118

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Unfinished ritualistic acts will yield no fruits just as
ploughing and sowing are not fulfilled, if the sequence of
actions --- as ploughing, watering, sowing, weeding,
guarding, harvesting, etc., are not kept up exactly in that
order. Similarly, some ritualistic acts, when they are not
performed faithfully, following all the strict injunctions,
the chances are that the very same meritorious acts might
result in sins, accrued through the non-performance, or
imperfect performance, of enjoined acts. This sin is called,
in the language of ritualistic literature, a 'Pratyavaya.' In
the material world also, we can find corresponding
instances wherein a medicine misused may bring about a
calamitous end for the patient.
These two are the dangers in the field of activities by
which we are cheated of all our expected results. Krishna
here, as a pukka publicity agent for his own philosophy,
vigorously asserts that his "Technique of Action," Karma
Yoga, guarantees safety from these two main dangers.
THE WISDOM CONCERNING SANKHYA AND YOGA
THUS FAR DESCRIBED IS OF THE FOLLOWING
NATURE:
41. Here, O Joy of the Kurus, Kurunandana, there is but a
single-pointed determination; many-branched and endless are
the thoughts of the irresolute.
In Karma Yoga, which the Lord is now explaining, even the
highest achievement of Self-realisation is possible because,
119

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

there, the man works with one resolute determination,
with a single-pointed mind. Those who perform actions,
labouring under endless desires for results, get their inner
personality disintegrated, and with a shattered, thousandpronged mind, they are not able, consistently, to apply
themselves to any line of action; therefore, their
endeavours invariably end in disastrous failure.
In this stanza lies the secret of Hindu success --- briefly
hinted at in hasty words herein. With a single-pointed
mind, if an individual can entertain any single resolutedetermination and act consistently towards its success,
achievement must certainly result. But invariably, man,
victimised by his ego, entertains hundreds of desires,
often mutually contradictory, and therefore, comes to play
upon these fields with an impoverished and exhausted
mental strength. This is, psychologically, what we call
"self-cancellation of thoughts." When this comes to plague
the mental zone, it exhausts all the potentialities of man
and loots away all his chances of success.
42. Flowery speech is uttered by the unwise, taking pleasure in
the eulogising words of VEDAS, O Partha, saying, "There is
nothing else. "
43. Full of desires, having heaven as their goal, they utter
flowery words, which promise new birth as the reward of their
actions, and prescribe various specific actions for the attainment
of pleasure and Lordship.
120

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

44. For, those who cling to joy and Lordship, whose minds are
drawn away by such teaching, are neither determinate and
resolute nor are they fit for steady meditation and SAMADHI.
Vyasa was one of the first daring revolutionaries in
Hinduism who ever came up to win back the Hindu
culture from the decadence it had fallen into, in his time.
The Bible of the Revolution that he created was the Geeta.
His vigorous criticism is reflected in the words of Krishna
when he characterises the ritualistic portion of the Vedas as
"the flowery words of the unwise." We have to live
mentally in the orthodox atmosphere of that age to
appreciate the daring with which Vyasa then had put up
this criticism so strongly.
The ritualistic sections of the Vedas address those who are
deeply attached to pleasure and power, whose
discriminative power --- the capacity to distinguish the
Real from the Unreal --- is stolen away from them, for they
are concerned about the results and rewards of Karma.
They were involved in the ritualism as such; not
concerned with the Higher, to reach which these are but
the means.
These Karmas, which promised the performer a POSTMORTEM heavenly existence, with supra-sensuous carnal
pleasures, are to be undertaken and laboriously pursued.
In all these activities man's inner personality has no time
or chance to get integrated and evolved, and, therefore,
from the spiritual stand-point, Vyasa feels that they are
121

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

methods of impotent religion. The ritualist gets involved
in the means, without aspiring for the Real Goal!
Thus, as an expounder of the TRANSCENDENTAL and
the INFINITE, Krishna is here laughing at those who
mistake the means for the end; the ritualistic portion is the
means and the Vedantic portion dealing with realisation
through meditation is the end. The Karma Kanda prepares
the mind to a single-pointedness, when it is pursued
without specific desires (Nishkama), and such a prepared
mind alone is fit for steady contemplation over the
Upanishadic declarations.
The passage is concluded with the declaration that such
persons, tossed about by their desires, shall never discover
and experience of tranquillity in their inner life.
THE LORD NOW SPEAKS OF THE RESULT ACCRUING
TO THOSE LUSTFUL PERSONS WHO ARE THUS
WANTING IN DISCRIMINATION:
45. The VEDAS deal with the three attributes; be you above
these three attributes (GUNAS) , O Arjuna, free yourself from
the pairs-of-opposites, and ever remain in the SATTWA
(goodness) , freed from all thoughts of acquisition and
preservation, and be established in the Self.
The three inseparable gunas always remain in the inner
constitution of every living creature, in varying
proportions. The mind and intellect are constituted of this
122

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

triple-stuff. To go beyond these three temperaments is
literally to go beyond the mind. If there is an alloy
constituted of copper, zinc, and tin, and a pot is made of
that alloy, then to remove all tin, zinc and copper from the
pot is to destroy the pot completely. Tea is made of hot
water, tea leaves, sugar and milk; and from a cup of tea if
you are asked to remove these four components of tea, it
amounts to saying 'empty the cup.' In the direct language
of the Upanishads, man has been advised to transcend the
mind and intellect, and they promise that the individual
shall thereby re-discover himself to be God. This direct
explanation came to frighten away the Hindu folk out of
the Aryan-fold, and so the CALL OF THE RENAISSANCE
here, though meaning the same, puts it in different words
when it says: "Arjuna, transcend the gunas."
If a doctor were to prescribe a medicine which is nowhere
in the catalogue of any pharmaceutical company in the
world, and, naturally, therefore, not available in any
bazaar, that prescription is certainly useless. Similarly, it
may be a great prescription for Self-perfection when the
Lord advises: "Be free from the triad of the gunas," but it is
useless unless a student, practical-minded and
adventurous enough to try to live this advice, can be
instructed as to how he can go beyond these instinctive
temperaments in man, viz., unactivity (Sattwa), activity
(Rajas) and inactivity (Tamas).
The second line in the stanza gives us a very practical and
direct method of transporting ourselves from the realm of
123

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

imperfection to the boundless regions of Bliss and
Beatitude. Earlier, Krishna had indicated how Arjuna
should enter the field and wage the war. The same mental
equanimity is being advised here in a different language.
Pairs-of-opposites are the experiences in our life such as
joy and sorrow, health and disease, success and failure,
heat and cold, etc. Each one of them can be experienced
and known only with reference to and as a contrast to its
opposite. Therefore the term 'pairs-of-opposites'
(Dwandwas) envisages, in its comprehensive meaning, all
the experiences of man in life. Krishna advises Arjuna to
be free from all pairs-of-opposites (Dwandwas).
NITYA-SATTWA-STHAH --- "Ever established in purity."
The purity, Sattwa, the subtlest of the three gunas, often
becomes impure by its contact with attachments and the
consequent agitations (Rajas) that attack the intellect with
delusion and grief, and veil it from the right cognition of
the Real Nature of things (Tamas). To be established in
purity (Sattwa) would, therefore, mean keeping ourselves
least agitated, and so, least deluded in our perceptions of
things and beings, and in our estimation of their true
nature.
Yoga and Kshema in their meaning include all the activities
of every living being in the universe. These are the two
urges which goad every one in all one's activities. 'Yoga'
means 'to acquire' for purposes of possessing; and
'Kshema' means 'all efforts at preserving the acquired.'
124

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus the two terms Yoga and Kshema encompass all our
ego-centric activities motivated by selfish desires to
acquire and, compelled by equally selfish wishes, to hoard
and preserve what has been acquired. To renounce these
two temperaments is to get away immediately from the
two main fields that yield the poisonous harvest of
extreme restlessness and sorrow in life.
It is very easy for a spiritual master to advise an aspirant
to be "free from the pairs-of-opposites, and remain ever
pure and free from the natural appetites for acquisition,
and the usual greed for preservation." But the philosophy
will be practical only when the seeker is advised as to
HOW he can do so. This 'how' of it all has been indicated
by the last word in the stanza: Atmavan --- "be established
in the Self." The persecutions of the pairs-of-opposites, the
instinct to be impure, the desire to possess and the anxiety
to preserve, all belong to the ego-centre, which is born
when the Self identifies with the body, mind and intellect,
and when the consequent ego suffers the pangs of
anxieties, pains and sorrows.
To detach ourselves from these by keeping a constant
sense of awareness of our pure Divine Nature is the Path
shown in the Geeta. Established in the Self, the individualego, ever pure and free from all anxieties, finds itself
beyond the experiences of the world. Necessarily, he will
be trans-gunas. One who is beyond the gunas has no more
use for the Veda Text Books --- he is the Master, thereafter,
to amend the Vedas or to add to them; he is the Master
125

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

who shall give the Divine sanction for the very Vedic
declarations.
IF ALL THOSE ENDLESS PROFITS WHICH ARE SAID
TO RESULT FROM THE VEDIC RITUALS ARE NOT TO
BE SOUGHT AFTER, THEN TO WHAT END ARE THEY
TO BE PERFORMED AND DEDICATED TO ISWARA?
LISTEN TO WHAT FOLLOWS:
46. To the BRAHMANA who has known the Self, all the
VEDAS are of so much use, as is a reservoir of water in a place
where there is flood everywhere.
It is a wonderful simile that is used here, fully applicable
in the context in which it is used. So long as there is no
flood, everyone from the vicinity will have to reach the
well to collect drinking water, although everywhere there
is a vein of water running under our feet, but separated
from us by the crust of the earth. For the seeker, the Veda
is the only source of True Knowledge, and every one must
necessarily go to the Sacred Book for Knowledge. But
when the area is flooded and the wells and the tanks have
disappeared in the spread of the flood, at that time the
reservoir of water, which used to be of service, becomes
merged in the spread of water that lies all round.
Similarly, the Vedas, meaning here "the ritualistic portion,"
which promises fulfilment of the various desires, can be
useful only so long as the individual is riddled with
delusory desires for sensuous satisfactions. But, to a
126

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sincere student and seeker (Brahmana) who has "come to
experience the Self" (Vijanatah) these ritualistic portions of
the Vedas become useless inasmuch as the benefits that
they can give are comprehended in the perfection that he
has come to live.
The Karma Kanda only prescribes rituals for the satisfaction
of desires whereby the individuals can gain some finite
joy, maybe here, or in the hereafter. Thus, on discovering
the Self in oneself, the seeker comes to experience the
infinite bliss of the Divine, and all the pleasures derived
from the performance of work enjoined in the Vedas are
comprehended in the Bliss, which the realised soul
experiences as the very Essence of his own Self. Everyone
must admit that all those limited "satisfactions" are
comprehended in the Infinite Bliss of the experience of the
Self.
This does not mean that Vyasa is ignoring or ridiculing
the Karma Kanda of the Vedas as such. The whip of the
Cowherd Boy is descending upon the bare backs of the
unintelligent, who have mistaken the means for the goal,
and who consider that through ritualism and its promised
joys, the Supreme or the Infinite can be gained. Karma,
when undertaken with no anxiety for the results,
integrates the personality; when a heart is thus purified, a
clearer discriminative power comes to play through it, and
in its light, Truth becomes self-evident. Having once
realised the Infinite-Self spreading out all round without
dimensions or frontiers, thereafter, the limited satisfaction
127

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

promised by ritualism has no more any charm for the
man-of-Knowledge, the Self-realised.
The Knowledge the Veda indicates is comprehended in
Pure Knowledge, which is the nature of the Self. So long
as the ego exists it craves for the blessings of the Vedas;
when the ego has ended, the Self, in Its Infinite Divinity is
capable of blessing even the Veda. A student of
mathematics, having successfully passed his postgraduate course, need not read the arithmetic table, since
his greater knowledge comprehends this elementary
study.
AND AS FOR YOU:
47. Thy right is to work only, but never to its fruits; let not the
fruit-of-action be thy motive, nor let thy attachment be to
inaction.
The traditional belief of Hinduism has not at all been
shaken in the Geeta-theory that single-pointed, divinededicated Karma, without desire for the fruits, shall bring
about inner purification, which is a condition precedent to
spiritual awakening. The Geeta only gives an exhaustive
exposition of this idea to incorporate in it ALL activities in
the social and personal life; while in the Vedas, Karma
meant only the religious and the ritualistic activities.
Philosophy is not a subject that can be rightly understood
by hasty students. The stanza now under review, when
128

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

not properly understood, would seem to indicate an
impossible method. At best, it would look as if it was a
religious sanction for the poor to continue to be poor and
a sacred permission for the rich to continue tyrannising
over the poor! To act in life "WITHOUT ANY
EXPECTATION OF RESULTS" would seem to be almost
impossible to one who is only trying to understand the
stanza mentally. But when the same individual, after his
studies, walks out into the open fields of life and tries to
practise it there, he shall discover that this alone is the
very secret of all real achievements.
Earlier, we have indicated how Krishna, through his
Karma Yoga, was showing "the art of living and acting" in a
spirit of Divine inspiration. Here also we shall find, as we
tussle with this idea in our attempt to digest it, that
Krishna is advising Arjuna on the secret-art of living an
inspired life.
Wrong imaginations are the banes of life, and all failures
in life can be directly traced to have risen from an
impoverished mental equanimity, generally created by
unintelligent entertainment of fears regarding possible
failures. Almost all of us refuse to undertake great
activities, being afraid of failures, and even those who
dare to undertake noble endeavours, invariably become
nervous ere they finish them, again, due to their inward
dissipastion. To avoid such wasteful expenditure of
mental energy and work with the best that is in us,
dedicated to the noble cause of the work undertaken, is
129

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the secret prescription for the noblest creative inspiration;
and, such work must always end in a brilliant success.
This is the eternal law-of-activity in the world.
The future is always carved out in the present.
Tomorrow's harvest depends upon today's ploughing and
sowing. But, in the fear of possible dangers to the crops, if
a farmer wastes his present chances of thoroughly
ploughing, and carefully sowing at the right time, it is
guaranteed that he shall not have any harvest at all. The
present moments are to be invested intelligently and well,
so that we may reap a better time in the future. The past is
dead; the future is not yet born. If one becomes unhealthy
and inefficient in the present, certainly he has no reason to
hope for a greater future.
This fundamental truth, very well-known and easily
comprehended by all, is, in the language of the Geeta, a
simple statement: "If success you seek, then never strive
with a mind dissipasted with anxieties and fears for the
fruits." In this connection it is very interesting to dissect
carefully and discover exactly what the Shastra means
when it says: "Fruits-of-action." In fact, the reward of an
action, when we understand it properly, is not anything
different from the action itself. An action in the PRESENT
itself, when conditioned by a FUTURE-time, appears as
the fruit-of-the-action. In fact, the action ends, or fulfils
itself, only in its reaction, and the reaction is not anything
different from the action; an action in the present, defined
in terms of a future moment, is its reaction. Therefore, to
130

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

worry over and get ourselves pre-occupied with the
anxieties for the rewards-of-actions is to escape from the
dynamic PRESENT and to live in a FUTURE that is not yet
born! In short, the Lord's advice here is a call to man not to
waste his present moment in fruitless dreams and fears,
but to bring his best --- all the best in him --- to the
PRESENT and vitally live every moment, the promise
being, that the future shall take care of itself, and shall
provide the Karma Yogin with the achievements divine
and accomplishments supreme.
In effect, therefore, Arjuna is advised: "All that is given to
you now is to act and, having known the cause of action to
be a noble one, to bring into the activity all that is best in
you and forget yourself in the activity. Such inspired
action is sure to bear fruit, and again, it has its own
reward-spiritual."
The stanza gives the four injunctions guiding us to be true
workers. A real Karma Yogin is one who understands: (a)
that his concern is with action alone; (b) that he has no
concern with results; (c) that he should not entertain the
motive of gaining a fixed fruit for a given action; and (d)
that these ideas do not mean that he should sit back
courting inaction. In short, the advice is to make the
worker release himself from all his mental preoccupastions, and thus through work make him live in the
joy and ecstasy of inspired self-forgetfulness. The work
itself is his reward; he gets himself drunk with the joy and
131

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

satisfaction of a noble work done. The work is the means;
the Higher Self-experience alone is the Goal-Divine.
By thus re-acting readily to all external challenges, with
his devoted attention upon Him, one can find peace easily,
and a bosom thus purged of its existing vasana-bondages
is, to that extent, considered better purified for the
purposes of meditation and the final Vedantic-realisation
of the Infinite glory of the Self.
IF A MAN SHOULD NOT PERFORM WORK
PROMPTED BY DESIRES FOR THEIR RESULT, HOW
THEN SHOULD HE PERFORM IT? THE REPLY
FOLLOWS:
48. Perform action, O Dhananjaya, abandoning attachment,
being steadfast in YOGA, and balanced in success and failure.
Evenness of mind is called YOGA.
From this stanza onwards we have an exhaustive
discussion of the technique of Karma Yoga as conceived by
Krishna in his Doctrine of Action and expounded in
Vyasa's Geeta. A complete technique of how one can live
the life of a truly inspired worker is explained here, and,
to any careful student, who understands all the
implications of the terms, it must be clear that a complete
effacement of the ego and its vanities is to be achieved to
succeed in this Path; and this is gained by practising the
equipoise mentioned in the previous stanzas.
132

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In this stanza, for the first time, the term Yoga has been
used in the sense of the "evenness of mind" through work,
and before it concludes, we also get an exhaustive
definition of the term Yoga as used in the stanza.
"Evenness of mind," the tranquillity of mental composure,
in facing all pairs-of-opposites is defined here as Yoga.
Defined thus, the term Yoga, indicates a special condition
of the mind in which it comes to a neutral equilibrium in
all the ebb and flow of life's tides. The instructions in the
stanza advise us that desireless action can be performed
only when one gets completely established in Yoga; here
the terms precisely paint what Vyasa's definition means.
Not only is it sufficient that a true worker should act in the
world, established in equipoise and equanimity, but he
should, amidst the changes of the world, also reinforce
this poise, through a renunciation of his "attachment"
(Sanga) to the immediate fruits of his actions.
We shall try to enquire into the "attachment," mentioned
here, which a seeker should renounce, so that he may
become more efficient in performing inspired activities. To
all sincere students, who have so far followed the Lord's
words, it should be clear that "attachment" here means all
factors against which Krishna has already warned us in
the earlier stanzas and insisted that we must renounce
them all --- viz., wrong imaginations, false expectations,
day-dreams about the fruits of actions, anxieties for the
results, and fears for future calamities that have not yet
133

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

appeared to threaten our lives. When it is put thus as a list
of mistakes to be avoided, any true Karma Yogin, striving
upon the Path of Yoga, will find it impossible to practise it.
But when we analyse this further with our understanding
of the Upanishads, we can easily solve the riddle.
All the above nerve-racking mistakes belong to the
delusory ego-centre. When we analyse closely the stuff of
which the ego is made we can easily find that it is a
bundle of 'MEMORIES OF THE PAST AND HOPES AND
EXPECTATIONS FOR THE FUTURE.' The dead moments,
that are no more, constitute the past. The future is unborn,
and does not yet belong to us. To live in the ego, therefore,
is to live either in the burial grounds of dead moments, or
in the womb of time where the unborn future now rests.
In all these pre-occupastions, we lose the immediate
moments given to us to act, to strive, to earn, and to
achieve. It is this unintelligent squandering of the wealth
of present chances, through our broodings and
imaginations, that is hinted at here by the genius of Vyasa
when he says, "Act, established in equanimity,
abandoning attachment."
Thus, in complete self-forgetfulness, to get intoxicated
with the activities undertaken in the present, is to live
vitally, fully and entirely with all the best that is in us. To
dissolve ourselves thus --- our past, our future, our hopes,
our fears --- into the fiery contents of the PRESENT is to
work in inspiration. And inspired work ever promises the
greatest returns.
134

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

An artist, who is at work, forgetting himself in the very
ecstasy of his work, is an example. One need not, for that
matter, be a great artist even. One who is working
interestedly with all his mind and intellect on any piece of
work will not be aware, immediately, of any chance
intruder. It will take time for the artist to come down from
the realms of his joyous mood to the crystallisation of the
ego in him to recognise the intruder, understand his
enquiry and give him an intelligent answer. In all inspired
activity, the worker forgets himself in the work that he is
doing.
In all such activities, when the worker has gained almost a
self-forgetfulness, he will not care for the success or failure
of his activity because, to worry for the results is to worry
for the future, and to live in the future is not to live in the
present. Inspiration is the joyous content of thrilled
ecstasy of each immediate moment. It is said that this
content of a moment in itself is "the entire Infinite Bliss."
"Established thus in equanimity, renouncing all egocentric-attachments, forgetting to worry over the results of
success or failure in the activities, act on," --- says, in effect,
Krishna to Arjuna; and he adds that the great Yoga is to
work thus with equipoise in all situations.
IN COMPARISON WITH ACTION THUS PERFORMED
WITH EVENNESS OF MIND, KRISHNA DECLARES:

135

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

49. Far lower than the YOGA -of-wisdom is action, O
Dhananjaya. Seek thou refuge in wisdom; wretched are they
whose motive is the "fruit. "
Work done with a mind undisturbed by anxieties for the
results is indeed superior to the work done by a
dissipasted mind, ever worrying over the results. Here the
term, "Buddhi yoga" has tickled some commentators to
discover in it a special Yoga advised by the Geeta. I
personally think that it is too much of a laboured theory.
Buddhi as defined in the Upanishads, is the determining
factor in the "inner-equipment"; Nishchyatmika is 'intellect';
Samshayatmika is 'mind'. Thus, when the thoughtflow is in
a state of flux and agitated, it is called the 'mind'; and
when it is single-pointed, calm and serene in its own
determination, it is called the 'intellect.' Thus, Buddhi yoga
means "to be established in the devotion to the intellect."
Steady in your conviction, your mind perfectly under the
control of your discriminative intellect, to live thus as a
master of your inner and outer world is called Buddhi yoga.
In Buddhi yoga we pursue our duties in life, without ever
losing sight of our ultimate Goal in Life.
Analysing the meaning of the stanza in terms of what we
have already seen regarding the split-personality and its
cure through Vasana-purgation, we may interpret Buddhi
yoga as an individual's attempt to live and act from the
zone of the intellect which freely controls the mind's
functions, and readily receives faithful obedience from the
mind. The attempt of the mind to work in union with the
136

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

intellect --- the "objective-mind" working under the control
and the order of the "subjective-mind" --- is called Buddhi
yoga. By so doing, instead of incurring more and more
liabilities of new Vasana-bondages, the individual gains a
release from the mental congestion created by the existing
Vasanas. Thus, when an individual completely surrenders
his ego, he is said to be "Established in Buddhi yoga."
Hence it is said "SEEK REFUGE IN Buddhi," meaning: "let
your mind be perfectly under the control and direction of
the intellect."
There is a solid reason why we should live under the
control of the intellect. Those who live in the mental zone,
tossed about by the mind's tribulations, get agitated by
anxiety for the fruits-of-actions. Such people are termed
here as 'wretched. ' It is a powerful statement by which
Vyasa condemns such thoughtless, unintelligent people:
"WRETCHED ARE THEY WHO ACT FOR THE
RESULTS." Understood properly, this is a wonderful
guidance by following which we can totally eliminate all
failures in life. Efficient activity in the present alone can
order great results.
They are "wretched" because they will be, in their desireprompted activities, incurring new Vasanas and thus will
be thickening the veil of ignorance of their own glorious
Divinity. Unselfish work, performed in a spirit of
dedication and ego-less surrender, is the secret method of
exhausting our Vasana-store. Such a mind alone, purged
137

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

clean, can reflect the Self clearly and come to discover the
Eternal God-hood.
NOW, LEARN WHAT RESULTS HE GAINS WHO
PERFORMS HIS DUTY WITH EVENNESS-OF-MIND:
50. Endowed with the Wisdom of evenness-of-mind, one casts
off in this life both good deeds and evil deeds; therefore, devote
yourself to YOGA, Skill in action is YOGA.
One who has an evenness of temper accomplished by his
perfect withdrawal from the realm of sentiments and
emotions, and who is established in his resolute intellect,
gets himself transported from the arena of both the good
and the bad, merit and de-merit. The conception of good
and bad is essentially of the mind, and the reactions of
merit and de-merit are left on the mental composition in
the form of Vasanas or samskaras. He, who is not
identifying with the stormy sea of the mind, will not be
thrown up or sunk down by the huge waves of Vasanas.
This idea is explained here by the term Buddhi yuktah: one
whose actions are all guided by his clear vision of his
higher and diviner Goal.
The Geeta, throughout this section, is sincerely calling
upon man not to live on the outskirts of his personality,
which are constituted of the worlds of sense-objects, the
physical body and the mind, but to enter into the realm of
the intellect, and from there to assert his natural
manliness. Man is the supreme creature in the kingdom of
138

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the living, because of the rational capacities of his
discriminative intellect. As long as man does not utilise
this special equipment in him, so long he cannot claim his
heritage as man.
Arjuna was asked by Krishna not to be a vain and
hysterical person, but to be a he-man and, therefore, ever a
master of all his external situations. The great hero,
Arjuna, became so frail and weak because he started living
in delusory identification with the sense of his own
physical security and with his various emotional
attachments.
He who lives constantly asserting his full evolutionary
status as man, becomes free from the chains and bondages
of all his past impressions (vasanas), which he must have
gathered in his pilgrimage through his different
embodiments.
"Therefore, apply yourself," advises Krishna, "to the
devotion of action, Yoga." In this context, again, Vyasa is
giving a definition of Yoga, as he means it here. Earlier, he
had already explained that "Evenness of mind is Yoga."
Now he re-writes the same definition more
comprehensively and says, "Yoga is dexterity in action."
In a science-book, if the very same term is defined
differently in every chapter, it would bring about
confusion in its understanding. How is it then that in the
Science of Religion, we find different definitions of the
139

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

same term? This riddle solves itself as soon as we carefully
attempt an intimate understanding of the definition. The
earlier definition is being incorporated in the latter one,
because, otherwise, "evenness of mind is Yoga" may be
misunderstood as a mere 'evenness of mind' producing
inaction and slothfulness. In this definition such a
misunderstanding is completely removed, and thus Karma
Yoga, as indicated in the all-comprehensive meaning
implied herein, indicates the art of working with perfect
mental equilibrium in all the different conditions
indicated by the term "pairs-of-opposites" (Dwandwas).
After dissecting this stanza thus, we come to understand
what exactly is the Lord's intention. When Yoga, "the art of
working without desire," is pursued, the Karma Yogin
becomes detached from all the existing vasanas in himself,
both good and bad. The vasana-pressure in the individual
causes restlessness within. The inner-equipment that has
become peaceful and serene is called the pure AntahKarana, which is an unavoidable prerequisite for
consistent, discriminative self-application in meditation.
Thus all actions, when properly pursued, become means
for the ultimate end of realising the Self through
meditation, with a pure mind.
We have here yet another example of Vyasa using the
frightening word Yoga in a tamer context in order to make
his society then feel at ease with it.

140

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHY SHOULD WE CULTIVATE THIS EVENNESS OF
MIND AND CONSEQUENTLY AN EXTRA DEXTERITY
IN ACTION?
51. The wise, possessed of knowledge, having abandoned the
fruits of their actions, freed from the fetters of birth, go to the
State which is beyond all evil.
Being a man of action, extremely intelligent, and having
not yet developed any blind faith in Lord Krishna's divine
potentialities, Arjuna still questions mentally, and the
Lord, anticipasting his doubt, explains here why a man of
true devotion to work should act, and with perfect
evenness of mind strive to achieve. The wise, meaning
those who know the art of true living, undertake all work,
maintaining in themselves the full evenness of mind, and
thus abandon all anxieties for the fruits of their actions.
These two conditions, under which the wise work, bring
out fully the picture of an individual who acts renouncing
both ego and ego-motivated desires.
By identifying with the agitations of the mind, the ego is
born, and, the ego so born gets riddled with desires as it
gets anxious for the fruits-of-its actions. When one works
with neither ego nor desires, one achieves vasanapurgation; this is possible only when one always has the
Higher Goal in view.

141

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

52. When your intellect crosses beyond the mire of delusion,
then you shall attain to indifference as to what has been heard
and what is yet to be heard.
When the intellect crosses over the morass of delusion,
when it sloughs off its delusions, the stanza here assures
Arjuna, that it will develop a disgust, "FOR ALL THAT IS
ACTUALLY HEARD AND THAT IS YET TO BE
HEARD." Here the term "WHAT IS YET TO BE HEARD"
must be understood as a representative term standing for
all "sense experiences that are yet to be experienced."
Naturally so; when the intellect becomes purer then it
loses all its erstwhile charm for sense experiences --- what
it had before, and what it may gain in the future.
Essentially Godly and Divine, Spiritual Consciousness
seems to fall under a self-delusion, which, when analysed,
becomes perfectly evident as to its effects. This cause of
delusion is conceived of as the indescribable power called
Maya. Like unmanifested electricity, Maya, as such, is not
perceptible except in its different manifestations. It is a
phenomenon that can be fully estimated and accounted
for through its varied expressions.
Observing and analysing the effects of Maya within the
constitution of all individualised and embodied souls, the
Vedantic masters have beautifully concluded that it comes
to play in two distinct modes of expression, at two
different layers of the human personality. Thus, at the
intellectual level it expresses itself as a film of doubt and
142

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

hesitation in its understanding, or experiencing, of the Self
in us. This expression Maya is termed by the Masters as
the "Veiling-Power" (Avarana-Shakti).
Due to this mist of ignorance, that envelops the intellect,
when it is unconscious of the Spiritual Reality behind it,
the mind starts projecting forth the world of the not-Self
and superimposes upon it two firm ideas that: (a) "it is
true" (Satyattwa), and (b) that "I am nothing other than the
projected world" (Atmabuddhi). This is Maya's expression
as "Projecting-Power" (Vikshepa-Shakti).
In this stanza it is said that, once the intellect in us is
purified through the art of steady-work, called 'Devotion
through Work,' it becomes possible for it to peep over the
veil of ignorance that separates it from the splendour of
the Spiritual Entity. When the intellect sloughs off its
delusions, it goes beyond its attachment for the charms of
the sensuous world. But before this happens, the intellect,
ignorant of its spiritual destiny, pants to fulfil itself and
surges forward seeking satisfaction amongst the finite
sense-objects of the world.
But, when the intellect discovers in itself a capacity to
pierce through the dreary veil of ignorance, it comes to
live its own Real Nature of Bliss Infinite. Each fleeting joy
in the sense-world only sharpens its appetite for the
Infinite Bliss which is Its Real Nature. To the extent the
clouds have moved and the sun has emerged, to that
extent he who is warming himself at the fireside moves
143

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

away from the fire-place and walks into the open, to bask
in the all-enveloping warmth of the blazing sun. Similarly,
to the extent the illusion of ignorance melts away in an
integrated intellect, to that extent its wanderings in the
sensuous-world are curtailed.
The sense-world is beautifully indicated by two
representative terms "what has been heard (Shrutam)," and
"what is yet to be heard (Shrotavyam)." We must include in
them 'the seen and the unseen,' 'the smelt and the
unsmelt,' 'the tasted and the not-tasted,' and 'the touched
and not-yet-touched.' The intellect of such a purified
Karma-Yogin does not relive its memory of the sensuous
joys it had experienced in the past and also does not
remember that it has to experience still more joys in the
future through the sense-organs, in the world of senseobjects.
If we take the word meaning of these terms literally we
get the usual interpretation of the commentators: "When
the seeker's mind is not tossed about by the seemingly
different and often opposing conclusions of philosophers,
when they do not upset him any more, then he is
established in inward purity."
SHANKARA CONNECTS THIS STANZA WITH THE
FOLLOWING: "YOU MAY NOW ASK, 'WHEN SHALL I
ATTAIN TRUE CONVICTION OF THE SELF, AFTER
CROSSING BEYOND THE VEIL OF IGNORANCE, AND
144

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OBTAIN WISDOM THROUGH THE DISCRIMINATION
OF THE SELF AND THE NOT-SELF? ' LISTEN:"
53. When your intellect, though perplexed by what you have
heard, shall stand immovable and steady in the Self, then you
shall attain Self-realisation.
When one's intellect comes to a steady equipoise,
UNDISTURBED by any of the experiences that reach one
through the five great arch-ways of knowledge, then one
is considered as having attained Yoga.
The mind gets agitated mainly due to the flooding-in of
the ever-new rush of stimuli from the outer world. Senseorgans are the antennae through which the world's
tickling signals creep in and disturb the mental-pool. One
is considered as having attained Yoga only when one, even
in the midst of enjoying sensuous pleasures, and even
while the sense-organs are letting in a flood of stimuli,
does not get at all disturbed in one's inner serenity and
equipoise This idea is better developed and exhaustively
dealt with later in the chapter, where Krishna enumerates
the visible qualities and the perceptible signs of one
established in Wisdom (Sthita-Prajna).
The discussion so far, makes Arjuna so interested that he
is now no more under the influence of his hysteria. He has
come to forget his dejection and sorrow, and is now taking
an active interest in Krishna's exposition. He could not
145

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

control himself from expressing his sincere enquiry as to
what exactly is the nature of such a perfected one who is
beyond the storms of sensuousness. The question
evidently shows that though Arjuna's intellect had
somehow come to appreciate Krishna's theory, something
in him was not quite ready to accept it fully.
LINKING UP THIS STANZA WITH THE NEXT,
SHANKARA SAYS: "ANXIOUS TO KNOW THE
CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF ONE WHOSE
INTELLECT HAS COME TO AN EQUIPOISE, HE ASKS
THIS QUESTION, AS SOON AS HE GETS A CHANCE
TO INTERROGATE":
Arjuna said: 54. What, O Keshava, is the description of him who
has steady Wisdom and who is merged in the Superconscious
state? How does one of steady Wisdom speak, how does he sit,
how does he walk?
In the last two stanzas the discussion naturally turned
towards the Ultimate Goal which a Karma Yogin reaches
when he has, with evenness-of-mind, perfected the
"technique of work."
The idea seems to be quite appealing and the theory,
indeed, logical. There is a ring of conviction in it, when the
theory comes from the mouth of Lord Krishna. Arjuna has
such a mental constitution that Karma Yoga appeals to him
the most.
146

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The grief-sticken hero of the first chapter has forgotten his
hysteria and has now come to take an active interest in the
discussion. As a practical man, he is afraid as to whether,
after gaining this great Goal of Life through Buddhi yoga,
he will be able to live so vigorously in the world outside.
Looking from the Vedic usage of the term, one is apt to
misunderstand that the perfected Yogin, who has come to
rediscover the Self, lives exclusively in a world of his own.
The description of the Upanishads can give a novitiate the
notion that a Perfected Sage is ill-fitted to live in the
world. Arjuna, as a child of the age of hatred and
diplomacy, was curious to know fully the condition of the
Perfected Master before he actually accepted the theory
and tried to live it.
His anxiety to know the entire Truth is clearly shown here
in his very questions upon such non-essentials as, 'How
does he speak,' 'how will he sit,' 'how will he walk,' etc.
These questions must be considered quite appropriate and
dramatic, when they come from one who had been, till
then, a patient of hysteria. Again, the first-half of the
stanza demands a description of a Man-of-Steady-Wisdom
while in Samadhi, that is, with regard to his inner life, and
the second half is asking for a description of how such a
Master will act in the world outside.
Arjuna is asking a forked question: (a) a description of the
state of mind in a man-of-realisation merged in Selfexperience and, (b) an explanation as to how that
147

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

experience will influence his actions in the outer world,
when he emerges from that Transcendental experience.
In this stanza and the following section, "Man-of-SteadyWisdom" (Sthita-Prajna), means one who has, through
direct realisation, come to experience and live his Godly
Self.
THE
LORD
NOW
POINTS
OUT
THOSE
CHARACTERISTIC ATTITUDES IN A REALISED
SAINT, WHICH, SINCE ATTAINABLE BY ALL
THROUGH RIGHT EFFORT, CONSTITUTE THE MEANS
AS SUCH:
The Blessed Lord said: 55. When a man completely casts off, O
Partha, all the desires of the mind, and is satisfied in the Self by
the Self, then is he said to be one of steady Wisdom.
By narrating thus the inner and outer life of the 'man-ofSelf-realisation,' Geeta helps us to detect for ourselves, the
right type of Masters from the charlatans who, though
wolves, wear a goat-skin and enter the fold of the faithful.
Apart from this, these passages have a direct appeal to all
sincere Sadhakas inasmuch as this section gives them an
easy thumb-rule as to what types of values and mental
attitudes they should develop, during their practice, in
order to realise the ever-effulgent Divinity in them --- the
Pure Awareness.

148

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This very opening stanza in this section, is a brilliant
summary of all that we should know of the mental
condition of the Perfect. The words used in this stanza can
be understood fully, only when we remember the
significant fragrance of these words as they stand dancing
among the hosts of other blossoms in the Garden of the
Upanishads. He is considered a Man-of-Wisdom who has
completely cast away ALL DESIRES from his mind.
Reading this stanza in conjunction with what Krishna has
so far said, we can truly come to enjoy the Upanishadic
fragrance in these inspired words of Vyasa.
An intellect, contaminated by ignorance becomes the
breeding-ground of desires, and he who has relieved
himself of this 'Ignorance' through 'Right-Knowledge'
gained in Perception, naturally, becomes 'desireless.' By
explaining here the absence of the EFFECT, the Lord is
negating the existence of the CAUSE: where desires are
not, there "ignorance" has ended, and "Knowledge" has
already come to shine forth.
If this alone were the distinguishing factor of the Man-ofSteady-Wisdom, then any modern man would condemn
the Hindu Man-of-Wisdom as a rank lunatic; a Hindu
wise-man would then become one who had not even the
initiative to desire. Desire means a capacity of the mind to
see ahead of itself, a scheme or a pasttern, in which he
who desires will probably be more happy. "The wise-man
seems to lose even this capacity, as he goes beyond his
149

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

intellect and experiences the Self," --- this is a criticism that
is generally heard from the materialists.
This stanza cannot thus be condemned since it adds in its
second line that the Perfect-One is "blissful" in his own
experience of the Self. A Perfect man is defined here,
therefore, not only as one who has no desires, but also as
one who has positively come to enjoy the Bliss of the Self!
When one is an infant, one has one's own playmates, and
as one grows from childhood to boyhood, one leaves one's
toys and runs after a new set of things; again, as the boy
grows to youthfulness, he loses his desires for the fancythings of his boyhood and craves for yet a newer set of
things; again, in old age, the same entity casts away all
objects that were till then great joys to him and comes to
demand a totally different set of objects. This is an
observed phenomenon. As we grow, our demands also
grow. With reference to the new scheme of things
demanded, the old sets of ideas come to be cast away.
In one's ignorance, when one conceives oneself as the ego,
one has a burning desire for sense-objects, a binding
attachment with emotions, and a jealous preference for
one's pet ideas. But when the ego is transcended, when the
ignorance, like a mist, has lifted itself, and when the finite
ego stands face to face with the Divine Reality in him, it
melts away to become one with the Infinite. In the Self, the
Man-of-Steady-Wisdom, 'SELF-SATISFIED IN THE SELF,'
can no more entertain any desire, or have any appetite, for
150

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the paltry objects of the body, or of the mind, or of the
intellect. He becomes the very Source of all Bliss.
Such a one is defined here by Vyasa as the 'Man-ofSteady-Wisdom' (Sthita-Prajna), and as the words come
out from the mouth of Krishna they gather the divine ring
of an incontrovertible Truth.
MOREOVER:
56. He whose mind is not shaken by adversity, and who in
prosperity does not hanker after pleasures, who is free from
attachment, fear and anger, is called a Sage-of-Steady-Wisdom.
In describing the attributes of a Perfect Sage, having
explained that he is one who has come to sacrifice all his
petty desires, in his self-discovered self-satisfaction in the
Self, Krishna explains that, another characteristic by which
we can recognise a sage, is his EQUANIMITY IN
PLEASURE AND PAIN. If, in the last stanza, Krishna
considered the man as an "actor," herein he is considering
him as an "experiencer," A BEARER OF BODYAFFLICTIONS.
One who is a stable being, whose heart is undisturbed in
sorrow or in joy, unattached, fearless, and sans-anger, is
described here as a Muni --- a silent sage. Of the emotions
that must be absent in an individual, who is a master in all
situations, we are here pointedly told only of these: (a)
attachment (Raga), (b) fear (Bhaya) and (c) anger (Krodha).
151

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In fact, when we read the biographies of perfected-ones, in
the entire history of man, we find in almost all of them an
antithesis of the ordinary man. The hundred emotions
common to the ordinary man are not at all seen in a
Perfect-one, and therefore, we feel surprised, when the
absence of only these three qualities is asserted so
emphatically here. Naturally a careful student gets
suspicious. Has Vyasa overlooked all other features? Can
this be a complete statement? But on a closer study we
shall discover that, he has not committed "the crime of
inappropriate emphasis upon the non-essentials," as critics
have been tempted to point out.
In the previous stanza we were told that "he is Perfect
who has forsaken all cravings that bubble up in his mind,"
and this stanza asserts the mental stability of such a one.
In the world outside, in our intercourse with the senseobjects, we can very easily realise that our attachments
with things create in us the pains of the perplexing fearphobia. When an individual develops a desire strong
enough to make a deep attachment, instinctively, he starts
entertaining a sense-of-fear for the non-winning of the
object so deeply desired; and, if it has been secured, then
again he fears for the security of the same acquired object.
Similarly, when an object has charmed one to a point of
deep attachment, and when fear itself has started coming
up in waves to disturb the individual, then, such an
individual's attitude towards those that come between
him and the object of his attachment, is called ANGER.
152

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Anger is thus nothing but a feeling that rises in us,
because of our attachment to an object, towards an
obstacle between ourselves and the object of our
attachment; the anger thus arising in a bosom is directly
proportional to the amount of fear one entertains on the
score of the obstacle holding one back from winning one's
object-of-love. Anger, therefore, is only our Raga for an
object, expressed at an obstacle that has come between us
and the object of our desire.
Shankara says that a Man-of-Steady-Wisdom is not
distressed by calamities (a) such as those that may arise
from the disorders of the body (Adhyatmika); (b) those
arising from external objects, such as tigers, etc.
(Adhibhautika); and (c) those arising from unseen causes
such as the cosmic forces causing rains, storms, etc.
(Adhidaivika). Fire increases when fuel is added. But the
'fire of desire' in a Perfect One does not increase when
more pleasures are attained. Such a person is called a
man-of-steady-Knowledge, a silent, serene sage.
MOREOVER:
57. He who is everywhere without attachment, on meeting with
anything good or bad, who neither rejoices nor hates, his
Wisdom is fixed.
An inspired artist, trying to express his idea on the canvas
in the language of colour, will off and on stand back from
his easel, and will again, with growing tenderness and
153

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

love, approach the product of his art, to place a few more
strokes with his brush; here Krishna, inspired by his own
theme, is again and again choosing right words to add
more light and shade to the picture-of-the-Perfect, the one
which he was painting upon the heart-slab of his listener -- Arjuna.
He who, without attachment, squarely meets life with all
equanimity and poise, is one who is "established in
Wisdom." Here also we have to understand the entire
stanza as a whole, or else, there will be the danger of
misinterpreting its true meaning. Mere detachment from
the things of life is NOT the sign of perfection, nor of true
discriminative understanding. But many unintelligent
enthusiasts actually desert their duties in life and run
away, hoping that, since they have developed perfect
detachment from the sensuous world, they will gain their
"goal" in the quietude of the jungle. Arjuna himself had
earlier stated that he would renounce the call of duty and
the field of activity. By thus retiring into quietude, the
Pandava-hero hoped to reach Perfection and Peace. To
dissuade Arjuna from taking this calamitous step, Krishna
started his discourse with a serious note in the second
chapter.
Detachment from suicidal affections and unintelligent
tenderness cannot by itself take man to the higher realms
of Divinity. Detachment from the world outside must
equally be accompanied by a growing balance in
ourselves to face all challenges in life --- ' auspicious'
154

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

(Shubha) and 'inauspicious' (Ashubha) --- in perfect
equipoise without either any uncontrolled rejoicing at the
Shubha, or any aversion for the Ashubha experiences.
A mere detachment in itself is not the way of perfect life,
inasmuch as it is only a negative existence of constantly
escaping from life. To live in ATTACHMENT is to live in
slavery to the things of the world. But the Perfect One is
he, who, with divine freedom, lives in the world,
dexterously meeting both joys and sorrows which life may
provide for him. In winter, to be out in the sun and lie
basking in its rays is to enjoy its warmth and at the same
time to suffer its glare. To complain of the glare is to bring
sorrow into the very enjoyment of the warmth. One who
is intelligent will either try to ignore the glare and enjoy
the warmth fully, or shade off the glare and bask in the
enjoyable warmth.
Similarly, life, by its very nature, is a mixture of both good
and bad, and to live ever adjusting ourselves --- avoiding
the bad and striving to linger in the experience of the good
--- is to live unintelligently. The Perfect-One experiences
the best and the worst in life with equal detachment
because he is ever established in THE TRUE AND THE
ETERNAL, which is the very Self.
In his question, Arjuna had enquired of Krishna, how a
Perfect Master would speak. This stanza may be
considered as an answer to it. Since the Perfect man-ofWisdom neither feels any aversion to the sorrows nor
155

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

rejoices in the joys of life, he neither compliments
anything in the world, nor does he condemn anything. To
him everything is wonderful. He sees things AS THEY
ARE, uncoloured by his mental moods. Such a Perfect One
is beyond all the known principles of behaviourism of
Western psychology.
MOREOVER:
58. When, like the tortoise which withdraws its limbs from all
sides, he withdraws his senses from the sense-objects then his
Wisdom becomes steady.
After explaining that a Perfect-One is: (a) ever satisfied in
the Self, (b) that he lives in perfect equanimity in pleasure
and pain, and (c) that there is, in him, a complete absence
of attachment to rejoicing or any aversion, it is here
mentioned that a Man-of-Steady-Wisdom has the special
knack of withdrawing his senses from all the disturbing
'fields of objects.' The simile used here is very appropriate.
Just as a tortoise can, even at the most distant suggestions
of danger, instinctively withdraw all its limbs into itself,
and feel safe within, a man-of-Perfection can consciously
withdraw all his antennae that peep out through his five
arches-of-knowledge, called the sense-organs.
In the theory of perception in Vedanta, the mind, bearing
the consciousness, goes out through the sense-organs to
the sense-objects, and, there it takes, as it were, the shape
of the sense-objects, and so comes to gain the "knowledge"
156

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of the objects perceived. This idea is figuratively put in the
Upanishad --- the Light of Consciousness, as it were, beams
out through the seven holes in the cranium, each special
'beam' of awareness illuminating only one specific type of
'object.' Thus, the 'Light' that passes through the eyes is
capable of illumining only the FORMS and COLOURS,
while that which emerges through the ears illumines
SOUNDS. In the material world, we can take the example
of the electric-light that expresses through an ordinary
bulb illuminating the objects in the room, while the
electricity, as light, emerging from the X-ray tube
penetrates through the form and illumines things that are
ordinarily not visible to the naked eye.
Thus, in each individual, five distinct beams of the same
Awareness protrude like antennae and give him complete
"knowledge" of the eternal world. These five avenues-ofknowledge bring to him the innumerable stimuli from the
outer world, which, reaching the mind, provide all the
disturbances that man feels in his life of contacts with the
outer world. If I am blind, the beauty that is passing by
cannot disturb my mind; if I am deaf, I cannot over-hear
criticism against myself, and naturally, it cannot reach me
to agitate my bosom! The untasted or the unsmelt or the
unfelt sense-objects can never bring any pang of sorrow
into the bosom. Here Krishna re-assures Arjuna that a
Man-of-Steady-Wisdom is he, who has the ready capacity
to fold back his senses, from any or all the fields of their
activity.
157

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This capacity in an individual to withdraw his senses at
will from the fields-of-objects is called in Yoga Shastra as
Pratyahara, which the Yogin accomplishes through the
control-of-breath (Pranayama). To a devotee this comes
naturally, because he has eyes and ears only for the form
and stories of his beloved Lord. To a Vedantin, again, this
(Uparati) comes from his well-developed and sharpened
discriminative faculty, with which his intellect makes his
mind understand the futility, of licking the crumbs of joy
and happiness in the wayside ditches of sensuousness,
while he, in his Real Nature, is the Lord of the very store
of Bliss Infinite.
THE SENSES OF A MAN WHO IS ILL, AND
CONSEQUENTLY NOT ABLE TO PARTAKE OF THE
SENSUOUS OBJECTS, ARE SEEMINGLY UNDER
CONTROL, BUT THE TASTE FOR THEM DOES NOT
THEREBY CEASE TO EXIST. HOW DOES EVEN THE
TASTE FOR SENSE-OBJECTS FINALLY END? LISTEN:
59. The objects of the senses turn away from the abstinent man
leaving the longing (behind) ; but his longing also leaves him on
seeing the Supreme.
Without Pratyahara (or Uparati), we can observe cases
wherein an individual comes to maintain sensewithdrawal from the sense-objects due to some physical
incapacity or due to some special mental mood of
temporary sorrow or misery. In all those cases, though the
sense-organs come to feel an aversion for the respective
158

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

objects, their inclination for these objects merely remains
dormant for the time being. Similarly, Arjuna doubts that,
even in a Yogin, the capacity to withdraw from the
temptations of the sense-world, may be temporary and
that, under favourable or sufficiently tempting
circumstances, they may again raise their hoods to hiss
and to poison. His doubt is answered here.
If you observe the flight of the objects of sensuousness
from the shops to their customers, you can understand
this point very clearly. They always reach only those who
are courting them and are panting to possess them. The
wine-cellars get emptied when the bottle "walkout" to
replenish the side-boards of the drunkards! Ploughs made
by the smithy are not purchased by artists and poets,
doctors and advocates, but they must necessarily reach the
homes of the farmers. Similarly, all sense-objects
ultimately reach those who are courting them with
burning desires. From one who is completely abstinent,
sense-objects must necessarily get repelled.
But even though the sense-objects may, temporarily, seem
to turn away from him who is abstinent, the deep taste for
them, ingrained in his mind, is very difficult to erase
completely. Here Krishna, in his Supreme Wisdom,
assures the seeker that these mental impressions of
sensuous lives, lived in the past by the ego, from the
beginning of creation to date, will all be totally erased, or
at least made ineffective --- as roasted seeds --- when the
159

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

seeker transcends the ego and comes to experience the
Self.
This is not very difficult to understand, since we know
that the objects of sorrow and occasions of tragedy in one
plane-of-consciousness are not available in another. The
kingship that I enjoy in my dream, does not add even a jot
to my dignity when I wake up to realise my insignificant
existence; so too, my meagre existence in the waking-state
will not debar me from the full kingly glory in my dreamkingdom!!
Similarly, the ego, existing now through the waking,
dream and deep-sleep states, has gathered to itself a dungheap of impressions, all purely sensuous. But these cannot
be effective when the same ego, transcending these three
planes, comes to experience the plane of Godconsciousness.
HE, WHO WOULD ACQUIRE STEADINESS OF RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE (Prajna) SHOULD FIRST BRING HIS
SENSES
UNDER
CONTROL.
FOR,
IF
NOT
CONTROLLED, THEY WILL DO HARM. SO, THE LORD
SAYS:
60. The turbulent senses, O son of Kunti, do violently carry
away the mind of a wise-man, though he be striving (to control
them) .

160

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In his discourse so far, the Lord has emphasized that a
perfect-Master is one who has complete control over his
sense-appetites. In India, a mere philosophical idea, in
itself, is not considered anything more than a poetic
ideology, and it is not accepted as a spiritual thesis unless
it is followed by a complete technique by which the seeker
can come to live it, in his own subjective experience. True
to this traditional Aryan faith, in the Geeta too, the Lord
indicates to Arjuna the practical method, by which he
should struggle hard, in order to reach the eminence of
perfection in all men-of-steady-Wisdom.
The ignorance of the Spiritual Reality functions in any
individual in three distinct aspects: "Unactivity" (Sattwa)
"Activity" (Rajas); and "Inactivity" (Tamas). When the
Sattwa aspect in us is molested by the "veiling of the
intellect" (Avarana) and the "lack of tranquillity" of the
mind (Vikshepa), then we come to the sorrows caused by
their endless roamings through the sense-organs. Unless
these are well-controlled, they will drag the mind to the
field of the sense-objects, and thus create a chaotic
condition within, which is experienced as sorrow.
That this happens even to a highly evolved seeker, is here
accepted by the statement of the Lord. With this assertion,
he is warning the seeker in Arjuna, that he should not on
any score let his "objective-mind" take hold of, and enslave
his "subjective-intellect." This warning is quite appropriate
and timely in the scheme of thought in this chapter.
161

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Invariably, among those who are practising religion, the
common cause by which very many true seekers fall away
from the Path, is the same all over the world. After a few
years of practice, they, no doubt, come to live a certain
inexplicable inward joy, and over-confident, and often
even vainful of their progress, they relax in their Tapas.
Once they come back to the field of the senses, "the
turbulent senses do violently snatch the mind away" from
the poise of perfect meditation!
61. Having restrained them all, he should sit steadfast, intent on
Me; his Wisdom is steady, whose senses are under control.
Since the sense-organs are thus the saboteurs in the
Kingdom of the Spirit that bring the disastrous downfall
of the Empire of the Soul, Arjuna is warned here that, as a
seeker of Self-perfection, he should constantly struggle to
control his sense-organs and their mad lustful wanderings
in their respective fields. Modern psychology would
certainly look down with a squint-eye upon this Geeta
theory, because, according to Freud and others,
sensuousness is instinctive in man, and to curb it would
lead to an unnatural suppression.
According to the West, TO CONTROL is TO SUPPRESS,
and no science of mental life can accept that suppression is
psychologically healthy. But the Vedic theory is not
pointing to any mental suppression at all. It is only
advising an inward blossoming, an inner growth and
162

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

development, by which one's earlier fields of enjoyments
through the senses, drop out to make room for the
perception of a newer field of ampler joys and more
satisfying Bliss.
This idea is very well brought out here, when Lord
Krishna, as though in the very same breath, repeats both
the negative and the positive aspects of the technique of
Self-development. He advises not only a withdrawal from
the unhealthy gutters of sensuousness, but he also gives
the healthy method of doing so by explaining the positive
technique of Self-perfection. Through a constant attempt
at focussing our attention "ON ME, THE SUPREME," he
advises the disciples to be steady.
In this simple-looking statement of half-a-verse, the Geeta
explains the entire technique of Self-development.
Immoral impulses and unethical instincts, that bring a
man down to the level of a mere brute, are the result of
endless lives spent among sensuous objects, during the
infinite number of different manifestations, through which
the embodied soul, the ego in each one of us, had
previously passed. It is humanly impossible for an
individual to erase and transcend in his life-time, the thick
coating of mental impressions gathered along his journey
from life to life, from embodiment to embodiment.
Naturally, this is the despair of all the promoters of ethics,
the teachers of morality and the masters of spirituality.

163

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Rishis of old, in their lived experience, discovered for
themselves a technique, by which, all these mental
tendencies could be eradicated. To expose the mind to the
quiet atmosphere of meditation upon the All-perfect
Being, is to heal its ulcers. By this process, one who has
come to gain a complete mastery over his sense-organs, is
considered as one who is 'steadfast-in-Wisdom.'
The concealed suggestion in the stanza now becomes quite
obvious; no one, who, with excessive force controls his
Indriyas, by sheer strength of will and sense of abstinence,
has any chance of flowering into a full-blown spiritual
beauty. He who has all his sense-organs, of their own
accord, lying tamely surrendered at his feet, who has
come to re-discover the Infinite Perfection in himself, is
called a man-of-Perfection. Neither has he ruined his
instruments-of-cognition, nor has he closed down the
arches-of-knowledge in him. A Perfect One is he whose
sway over the animal in him is so complete that the inner
Satan has become, for the Sage in him, a tame Caliban to
run errands and serve faithfully.
NOW THE LORD PROCEEDS TO POINT OUT THE
SOURCE OF ALL EVIL IN THE CASE OF THE
UNSUCCESSFUL:
62. When a man thinks of objects, "attachment" for them arises;
from attachment "desire" is born; from desire arises "anger" . . .

164

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

63. From anger comes "delusion" ; from delusion "loss of
memory" ; from loss of memory the "destruction of
discrimination" ; from destruction of discrimination, he
"perishes. "
From this verse onwards, Lord Krishna explains in five
noble stanzas, the Hindu psychological theory of the fall
of man from Godhood. This is only to bring home to
Arjuna that he, the mighty-armed, must try to conquer all
his Indriyas from all sides. Such a man, concludes Krishna,
is a-man-of-Perfection as conceived in and contemplated
upon, as explained in and glorified by the scriptural books
of the Hindus.
This section also gives us a clear pasttern of the
autobiography of all seekers who have, after long periods
of practice, come to wreck themselves upon the rocks of
failure and disappointment. To a true seeker in Vedanta,
no fall is ever possible. Instances of unsuccessful seekers
are not few, and in all of them the mistake that we notice
is that they ultimately fell back to be victims of senseentanglement; and in all those cases we also notice that the
fallen one drank the very dregs of it; there is no half-way
house for such victims --- a slip for them means total
destruction!!
The ladder-of-fall is very beautifully described here. The
path of destruction for a seeker is so elaborately detailed
in these stanzas that, fallen as we are, we shall know how
to get back to our pristine glory and inward perfection.
165

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Like a tree emerges from a seed, the source of all evil
starts from our own wrong thinking, or false
imaginations. Thought is creative; it can make us, or mar
us. If rightly harnessed, it can be used for constructive
purposes; if misused, it can totally destroy us. When we
constantly think upon a sense-object, the CONSISTENCY
OF THOUGHT creates in us an ATTACHMENT for the
object of our thought; and, when more and more thoughts
flow towards an object of attachment, they crystallize to
form a BURNING DESIRE for the possession and
enjoyment of the object-of-attachment. The same force of
the motion, when directed towards obstacles that threaten
the non-fulfilment of our desires, is called anger (Krodha).
An intellect fumed with anger (Krodha) comes to
experience DELUSION and, the deluded intellect has no
power of discrimination, because it loses all MEMORIESOF-THE-PAST. Any one filled with anger is capable of
doing acts totally forgetting himself and his relationship
with all others. Sri Shankaracharya says in this connection
that a deluded fool, in this mental condition, might even
fight with his own teachers or parents, forgetting his
indebtedness to these revered persons.
Thus, when an individual, through wrong channels of
thinking, becomes ATTACHED to an object, the
attachment matures into a burning DESIRE to posses that
object. Then, when an obstruction to possess that objectof-desire shoots him up into a fit of ANGER, the mental
disturbance caused by the emotion DELUDES the intellect
166

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and makes the individual FORGET his sense of proportion
and his sense of relationship with things and beings
around him. When thus, a deluded intellect forgets its
dignity of culture, it loses its discriminative capacity,
which is called, in common parlance, as 'conscience'
(Buddhi). Conscience is that knowledge enjoyed for
differentiating the good from the evil, which often forms a
standard in ourselves, and, whenever it can, warns the
mind against its lustful sensuousness and animalism.
Once this 'conscience' is dulled, the man becomes a twolegged-animal with no sense of proportion, and with no
ears for any subtler call in him, than the howling urgent
hungers of the flesh. Thereby, he is guaranteeing for
himself a complete destruction inasmuch as such a bosom
cannot come to perceive, or strive for, the Higher, the
Nobler and the Diviner.
THE CONTEMPLATION OF SENSE-OBJECTS HAS
BEEN DESCRIBED AS THE SOURCE OF ALL EVILS.
NOW THE MEANS OF DELIVERANCE (MOKSHA) IS
DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
64. But the self-controlled man, moving among objects, with his
senses under restraint, and free from both attraction and
repulsion, attains peace.
He alone --- who, with perfect self-control, goes through
life among the infinite number of sense-objects, each
impinging upon him and trying to bind him with its
charm, and approaches them with neither love nor hatred
167

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

--- comes to enjoy PEACE. By running away from the
sense-objects, nobody can assure for himself any inner
peace; because, the inner disturbance depends not upon
the presence or the absence of the sense-objects in the
outer-world, but essentially upon the mind's agitations for
procuring the desirable objects, or for getting rid of the
undesirable objects.
But a Master-of-Wisdom, with perfect self-control, moves
among the objects of the world with neither any special
love, nor any particular aversion, for them. Wherever I go,
my shadow must play all around me according to the
position of the light; but the shadow can neither entangle
me with love, nor can destroy me with hatred! The outerworld-of-objects is able to whip that man who lends the
power to the objects to smother him!!
Supposing there is a lunatic who is whipping himself and
weeping in pain; his sorrows can be ended only when he
is persuaded not to take the whip in his hand. He could be
advised, even if he kept the whip in his hand, not to swing
his arms in the fashion in which he is doing! Similarly,
here, the mind woos the objects and gets beaten. It is told,
as an advice, that an individual who lives in self-control,
will no longer lend his own life's dynamism to an object to
persecute him --- through his own sentimental aversion to,
or love for, that object.
When the lunatic is taught not to wield the whip and
strike himself, he is immediately saved from the sorrows
168

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of the whip. Similarly, when a mind is trained in these two
aspects: (a) to live in self-control, and (b) to move among
the sense-objects, with neither an attachment for, nor an
aversion to them, the disturbances and agitations in the
mind caused by the sense-enchantments are all
immediately brought under control. This condition of the
mind is called tranquillity or peace (Prasada).
This is symbolically represented in the sweet-distribution
after every Puja in all religions, and is called among the
Hindus as Prasada (or Bhog), meaning that, one who has,
during the ritual, practised perfect self-control and Godcontemplation, comes to enjoy, as a result of his action, a
tranquillity in the mind which is termed as Spiritual
Grace, or Divine Peace (Ishwara Prasada).
Here, as far as a Vedantin is concerned, Prasada is mental
purification. That mind is considered as pure, which feels
in itself the least sense-disturbances. One who has learnt
to live in self-control and has trained himself to live
among the sense-objects in a spirit of the least attachment
to, or aversion for them, has the least disturbance, because
of the ineffectiveness of the sense-objects upon him.
Thereby, his mind automatically becomes more and more
calm and tranquil, and is considered as pure (Prasada) for
purposes of the spiritual life.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN WHEN PEACE IS ATTAINED?
LISTEN:
169

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

65. In that peace all pains are destroyed; for, the intellect of the
tranquil-minded soon becomes steady.
It is natural for an Arjuna-mentality of uncompromising
intellectualism to ask Krishna: "Then what?" And as an
answer, the Lord explains why he should develop and
maintain tranquillity of the mind in himself. "IN
TRANQUILLITY ALL SORROWS ARE DESTROYED."
This sentence is obviously commented upon as a
definition of happiness. A peaceful mind is significant of
happiness. PEACE IS HAPPINESS; HAPPINESS IS
PEACE. The least-agitated mind is proof against all
sorrows inasmuch as sorrow is nothing but a state of
agitation in the mind.
This explanation does not satisfy us completely since
Krishna's assertion is that 'sorrows will be destroyed'
(hanih). In order to bring out clearly the meaning implied
in the phrase 'destruction of sorrows,' we will have to
understand it as the "elimination of vasanas." Earlier, in the
introduction, we have said that the vasana granulations,
giving a thick coating to the subjective mind, are the cause
for its delusion which creates all sorrows for the imperfect;
while the Perfect transcends the vasanas through the
Buddhi yoga explained earlier.
It is very well-known that all the vasanas existing in an
individual who is facing life constantly, cannot be fully
eradicated by him. The secret of doing so has been
explained here by the Lord. Keeping the mind exposed to
170

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

an atmosphere of tranquillity (Prasada), consciously
brought about through an intelligent life of self-control, is
the secret whereby all the vasanas can get eliminated.
THIS TRANQUILLITY IS EXTOLLED HERE BY LORD
KRISHNA:
66. There is no knowledge (of the Self) to the unsteady; and to
the unsteady no meditation; and to the unmeditative no peace; to
the peaceless, how can there be happiness?
Here is an explanation why quietude of the mind is so
often and so insistently emphasised in the literature
explaining the Hindu-technique of Self-perfection. Unless
the mind be quiet, the individual will not have the
intellectual leisure for cultural self-development, nor the
inner energy for consistently living spiritual perfections,
that a truly developed man yearns for. Unless there is
tranquillity, there cannot be steadiness of intellectual
application to the problems of life, and without this selfevaluation of life and true observation with a clear
discriminative analysis, we cannot have in us the required
amount of "Devotion to Self-knowledge" (Bhavana).
Without such a glorious Goal before us, constantly
beckoning us unto itself, like a pole star, our life shall be a
lost ship in an ocean, going nowhere, reaching nowhere,
and ultimately foundering upon some treacherous rock.
One who has no philosophical goal in life to strive and
yearn for, will not know what peace of mind is, and to one
171

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

who is thus restless, "where is happiness?" To live in
balance, and sail safely upon the uncertain waves of the
ocean of life, through both its smiling weather and stormy
days, we must have a constant perception of the Real.
Without a drummer, the dancers' foot-work cannot be
rhythmic and cannot keep perfect time.
WHY IS THERE NO
UNSTEADY? LISTEN:

KNOWLEDGE

FOR

THE

67. For, the mind, which follows in the wake of the wandering
senses, carries away his discrimination, as the wind carries
away a boat on the waters.
As a ship with sails up and helmsman dead would be
completely at the mercy of the fitful storms and reckless
waves, and will not reach any definite harbour, but is
destroyed by the very tossings of the waves, so too, life
gets capsized and the individual drowned, if his mind is
unanchored and left to be carried hither and thither by the
uncertain buffets of passionate sense-storms. Therefore,
the senses are to be controlled if man is to live a better and
more purposeful life, designed and planned for enduring
success.
HAVING
EXPLAINED
THE
PROPOSITION
ENUNCIATED EARLIER, THE LORD CONCLUDES BY
RE-AFFIRMING HIS STATEMENT:

172

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

68. Therefore, O Mighty-armed, his knowledge is steady whose
senses are completely restrained from sense-objects.
It is natural, in conversation, that we do not directly give
our wise conclusions upon "the do's and dont's" of life,
without giving the logic of our thoughts leading to our
conclusions. Without preparing our friend's mind to
perceive the logic of these conclusions, we dare not
declare to him any truth, however divinely acceptable the
declarations are. Arjuna has been told earlier all the
necessary arguments, and here in the stanza, Krishna reasserts the same proposition: "Life in self-control alone is
life worth living, if we demand from it anything more
than tears, sobs, sighs and groans."
He alone is a man of Wisdom, rooted in joy and bliss, who
has completely restrained all his senses from their wild
roamings among their sense-objects.
"BY DESTROYING THE SENSE ORGANS ROAMING IN
THE SENSE-OBJECTS," it does not mean that a man of
Self-development should destroy his capacities for
perception of the world outside; nor does it mean that he
is one who has been rendered incapable of enjoying life.
Sense-debility is no sign of better-knowledge. It is only
meant here that the sense-objects filtering through the five
archways of knowledge will not, in a Perfect man, flood
his mind to bring chaos and destruction of his established
inner peace and tranquillity.
173

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The ordinary individual, in his ego-centric existence,
becomes victimized by the sense-organs, while he who
has conquered the ego and has transcended his matteridentifications, comes to live in freedom and perfect
control over the tyrannical sense organs.
IN ORDER
PROCEEDS:

TO

MAKE

IT

CLEAR,

THE

LORD

69. That which is night to all beings, in that the self-controlled
man keeps awake; where all beings are awake, that is the night
for the Sage (MUNI) who sees.
In order to bring home to Arjuna the idea that the world,
as experienced by an individual through the goggles of
the mind-intellect-body, is different from what is
perceived through the open windows of spirituality, this
stanza is given. The metaphorical language of this verse is
so complete in detail that the data-mongering modern
intellect is not capable of entering into its poetic beauty.
Of all the peoples of the world, the Aryans alone are
capable of bringing about a combination of poetry and
science, and when the poet-philosopher Vyasa takes up
his pen, to pour out his art on to the ancient palmyraleaves to express the Bliss of Perfection, in the ecstasy, he
could not have used a better medium in the Geeta, than
his poetry.
Here, two points-of-view --- of the ignorant and of the
wise --- are contrasted. The ignorant person never
174

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

perceives the world as it is; he always throws his own
mental colour on to the objects and understands the
imperfections in his mind to be a part and parcel of the
objects perceived. The world, viewed through a coloured
glass-pane, must look coloured. When this colouring
medium is removed, the world appears AS IT IS.
The Consciousness in us is today capable of recognizing
the world only through the media of the body, mind, and
intellect. Naturally, we see the world imperfect, not
because the world is so, but because of the ugliness of the
media through which we perceive it.
A Master-mind is he who, rooted in his Wisdom, opens up
the windows-of-his-perception and looks at the world
through the eye-of-Wisdom.
When an electrical engineer comes to a city, and when at
dusk, the whole city smiles forth with its lights, he
immediately enquires: "Is it A. C. or D. C. current?"; while
the same vision, to an illiterate villager, is a wondrous
sight and he only exclaims: "I have seen lights that need
no wick or oil!" From the stand-point of the villager, there
is no electricity and no problem of A. C. or D. C. currents.
The world the engineer sees among the very same lamps,
is not realised or known by the unperceiving intellect of
the villager. Nor is the engineer awake to the world of
strange wonderment which the villager enjoys.

175

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here, we are told that the ego-centric, finite, mortal is
asleep to the World-of-Perception enjoyed and lived by
the Man-of-Steady-Wisdom; and that the Perfect One
cannot see and feel the thrills and sobs which the ego
experiences in its selfish life of finite-experience.
THE LORD PROCEEDS TO TEACH BY AN
ILLUSTRATION THAT A WISE DEVOTEE ALONE,
WHO HAS ABANDONED DESIRES AND WHOSE
WISDOM IS STEADY, CAN ATTAIN MOKSHA, AND
NOT HE WHO, WITHOUT RENOUNCING, CHERISHES
DESIRES:
70. He attains Peace into whom all desires enter as waters enter
the ocean, which, filled from all sides, remains unmoved; but not
the "desirer of desires. "
It is very well-known that although millions of gallons of
water reach the ocean through the various rivers, yet the
level of water in the ocean does not change even by a
fraction. Similarly, even though the infinite number of
sense-objects may pour in their stimuli, and reach the
mental zone of the Perfect Man through his five sensechannels, they do not create any commotion or flux, in his
bosom.
Such an individual, who always finds his own level in
spite of the fact that he is living amidst the sense-objects,
and with his sense-organs unavoidably ever in contact
with the objects, is called a Man-of-Perfection, a true Saint.
176

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

And Krishna asserts that such an individual alone can
truly discover peace and happiness in himself. The Lord,
in the Geeta, not satisfied with this negative assertion,
positively denies any true peace or joy to those who are
"desirers of desires."
This idea is totally in opposition with the modern belief in
the material world. The materialists believe that by
fanning up their desires, and satisfying as many of them
as possible, one is helped to live a life of joy and
happiness.
Modern
civilisation,
based
upon
industrialisation and large-scale production, is attempting
to whip up desires, and this attempt has now succeeded to
such an extent that the average man has a million times
more desires today than his fore-father ever entertained, a
century ago. The financiers and the industrialists, with the
aid of modern scientific knowledge, struggle hard to
discover and to satisfy new desires, and to the extent an
individual has come to fulfil his newly-created desires, he
is taught by the day's civilisation that he is more happy
than ever before.
On the other hand, the great thinkers of the past in India,
perhaps through their experience, or through their more
careful and exhaustive thinking, discovered that the joy
created through satisfaction of desires can never be
complete. They discovered that joy or happiness, at any
given time, is a quotient when the "number of desires
fulfilled" is divided by the "total number of desires
entertained" by the same individual at that time. This
177

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mathematical truth has been accepted by the modern
preachers of secularism also; but in their practical
application, the old Rishis and the modern politicians
seem to differ to a large extent.
In the modern world, the attempt is to increase the
numerator, which is represented by the "number of the
desires fulfilled." The Scriptural Masters of India also were
living in a world peopled by a society of men, and their
philosophical contemplations were upon man as a social
being, and their aim too was to bring more happiness in
their society. Unlike the present prophets of profit, these
Rishis of Religion did not conceive that an attempt to
increase the NUMERATOR without a corresponding
attention upon the rate of increase of the
DENOMINATOR, could produce any palpable increase in
joy. On the other hand, today, we are struggling hard to
increase the "number of desires fulfilled" without at the
same time, trying to control the "number of desires
entertained." That this state of affairs cannot produce any
palpable increase in the QUOTIENT OF HAPPINESS is
the scriptural verdict which seems to be an easily
understandable scientific truth.
Herein, the Geeta is only repeating what the Upanishadic
Rishis never get tired of emphasising in the Scriptures of
India. The "desirer of desires" can never come to perfect
peace (Shanti). Only he who has, in his spirit of
detachment, gained a complete control over his mind, so
that the sense-objects of the outer world cannot create in
178

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

him an infinite number of yearnings or desires, is the
Man-of-Peace-and-Joy. The objects in the outer world
cannot themselves tease a man by their existence, or by
their non-existence. The outer world can borrow its
capacity to ill-treat man only when he exposes himself
unguarded, and gets wounded and crushed by his own
attachments to a wrong valuation of the sense-objects.
In this stanza Bhagawan is only giving a more elaborate
and complete commentary upon the opening line of this
section where He started the description of a Man-ofSteady-Wisdom. There He explained that, "When a man
completely casts off all the desires in his mind, then he is
said to be one of Steady-Knowledge."
BECAUSE IT IS SO, THEREFORE:
71. That man attains peace who, abandoning all desires, moves
about without longing, without the sense of 'l-ness' and 'myness. '
There are commentators who believe that this and the
following stanza explain the Path of Renunciation, which
is, in fact, not altogether ignored in the text of the Geeta.
Since, as we said earlier, the second chapter is almost a
summary of the entire Divine Song, it has to indicate even
this Samnyasa Yoga, which will be later on explained at
length and hinted at different places during the entire
length of the Geeta.
179

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This stanza seems to ring clearly the significant advice
given earlier by Krishna, almost at the very opening of his
philosophical discussions, in this chapter. He had advised
therein: "HAVING CONQUERED THE MENTAL
AGITATIONS
CREATED
BY
THE
PAIRS-OFOPPOSITES, FIGHT THE BATTLE OF LIFE." The same
idea seems to be resounding here at the close of the
chapter.
The first line of the stanza explains the mental condition of
one who comes to discover Real Peace in himself. Such an
individual, it says, renounces all desires and has no
attachments or longings. The second line describes the
condition of such an individual's intellect and it asserts
that it is without any sense of 'I-ness' or 'my-ness.' The ego
is the cause for the sense-attachments and longings.
Where the ego is not perceptible, as in sleep, there are no
longings or desires in the individual or, at least, they are
dormant. Thus, if the first line of the stanza is describing a
negation of the effects of "ignorance," the second line
asserts the absence of the very cause from which desires
and the agitations arise.
Earlier, in the introduction, we explained that the split in
the personality of Arjuna was caused by the intervention
of the sense of his ego and his egoistic-desires, which
broke up the subjective and objective aspects of his mind
into two independent islands with a vast ocean of surging
waves of desires between them. With a soft suggestion,
after explaining all the logic of thought, Krishna is
180

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

carefully placing his finger on the very ulcer in the
Pandava's mind.
The stanza, in its sum-total suggestions, advises us that all
our sufferings in the world are caused by our own egocentric misconception and the consequent arrogance
characterised by our ever-multiplying demands for wealth
and our endless desires.
Samnyasa means sacrifice, and to live in a spirit of sacrifice
after renouncing completely one's ego and its desires is
true Samnyasa, wherein an individual comes to live in
constant awareness of his fuller and ampler Divinity. The
general misunderstanding that to run away from life is
Samnyasa, or to colour the cloth is to become a true monk,
has cast an irreparable slur on the philosophy of the
Upanishads. Hinduism considers him alone to be a
Samnyasin "who has learnt the art of living his life in
constant inspiration, which is gained through an
intelligent renunciation of his ego-centric misconceptions."
Shankara beautifully explains this point of view in his
commentary on the stanza. "THAT MAN OF
RENUNCIATION, WHO, ENTIRELY ABANDONING
ALL DESIRES, GOES THROUGH LIFE CONTENTED
WITH THE BARE NECESSITIES OF LIFE, WHO
REGARDS NOT AS HIS, EVEN THOSE THINGS WHICH
ARE NEEDED FOR MERE BODILY EXISTENCE, WHO IS
NOT VAIN OF HIS KNOWLEDGE, --- SUCH A MANOF-STEADY-KNOWLEDGE, WHO KNOWS BRAHMAN,
181

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ATTAINS PEACE (NIRVANA), THE END OF ALL THE
MISERY OF MUNDANE EXISTENCE (SAMSARA). IN
SHORT, HE BECOMES BRAHMAN.
THIS DEVOTION TO KNOWLEDGE IS EXTOLLED AS
FOLLOWS:
72. This is the BRAHMIC -state, O Son of Pritha. Attaining
this, none is deluded. Being established therein, even at the end
of life, one attains to oneness with BRAHMAN.
To renounce all desires is to destroy completely the last
vestures of one's ego. Renunciation of ego is not a state of
dull, meaningless emptiness. Where the delusory ego has
ended, the State of Full-Knowledge, or Selfhood, has
dawned. To realise the Self in one's own bosom is to
realise at once the Self which is All-pervading and Eternal
(Brahman).
When the ego has ended, the Consciousness is not known
to be anything other than the Eternal, and as such the
Knower of Truth, in a brilliant experience of the Self,
becomes the Self, and therefore, this state is called Selfhood (Brahmi-sthitih).
A doubt may still arise that even after this realisation, we
may again fall into the delusion of the ego and come to
suffer the ego's world of imperfections and sorrows. To
deny this tragedy, we have been told how, having realised
the Self once, no more can the individual fall back into his
182

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ancient delusions. This experience of the Self need not
necessarily take place in the very youthful days of one's
life. Even in old age --- nay, even in the last moment of
this embodiment --- if a seeker can come to experience,
even for a moment, this egoless State of Tranquillity and
Poise, even a passing glimpse of the Selfhood, it is
sufficient to gain this Brahmic-State pointed out in
Vedantic literature.
"Negation of the false and assertion of the True" is the
Path that has been indicated in the Upanishads. The very
same path, in its practical application, is designated here
in the Geeta, in Vyasa's original contribution, as Karma
Yoga. To work without attachment and desires, egoism
and vanity, ever in perfect equilibrium in both success and
failure, is to deny the ego its entire field of activity, and
unconsciously to assert the greater Truth, the Self. Thus, in
technique, the Geeta's Karma Yoga is not at all different
from the Vedantic Technique of Meditation. But Arjuna got
confused and perplexed because he took Krishna's words
too literally, and therefore, in the following chapter, he
expresses his mental confusion in the opening lines. The
Lord, therefore, explains Karma Yoga exhaustively in the
next chapter.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the second discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE
183

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This chapter is named as 'Sankhya Yoga' not in the sense
that it is the Sankhyan philosophy here summarised or
borrowed by Krishna. Here the word Sankhya is used only
in its etymological sense as "the sequence of logic in any
line of correct thinking and the logical enumeration of the
arguments based on which a certain intellectual
conclusion has been arrived at." It is in this sense that the
highly philosophical Chapter II of the Geeta is termed as
Sankhya Yoga in its epilogue (Sankalpa Vakya).
It is true that in the original Mahabharata, the Geeta
chapters do not carry this Sankalpa Vakya. Commentators
differ in attributing to any single individual the
authorship of this Sankalpa Vakya. However, it has been
accepted that some scholar, or scholars, analysed the
contents of each chapter and gave an appropriate title to
each. To all students of the Geeta, it is indeed a great help.
Shankara, however, does not comment upon this portion
at all.
Om Om Om Om Om

184

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 3
Karma Yoga
The Yoga of action
Arjuna said: 1. If it be thought by you that 'knowledge' is
superior to 'action, ' O Janardana, why then, do you, O
Kashava, engage me in this terrible action?
Arjuna still believes that, to fight against his cousins,
teachers and grandfathers is a terrible (ghora) action. He
seems to have forgotten, or not to have understood at all,
Krishna's words in the last chapter. Kashava had therein
explained and clearly indicated that the Mahabharata-war
was not Arjuna's attempt to murder any of his cousins or
teachers. Arjuna cannot have any individual personality
185

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in any army. It was a war. In a war the two armies fight,
and it represents the clash of two ideologies. The
Pandavas were convinced of the moral purity, the
spiritual worth, and the divine glory of their standpoint in
the imminent test of strength. But unfortunately, Arjuna
could not sink his egoism, and see himself totally
identified with the army, championing the cause of the
good. To the degree he could not identify himself with the
cause, to that extent he nourished a self-centered egoistic
vanity, and, therefore, his moral puritanism in fighting the
war.
Arjuna means to say that Krishna's arguments were
supporting the 'Path-of-Renunciation,' they included an
advice to Arjuna to undertake the great and terrible 'Pathof-Action.'
MOREOVER:
2. With this apparently perplexing speech you confuse, as it
were, my understanding; therefore, tell me that "one" way by
which, I, for certain, may attain the Highest.
Suffering from his own delusions as he was, Arjuna,
intellectually an average man, had not in himself that
amount of subtle philosophical acumen to discriminate
between the subtle arguments, and grasp for himself
whether the 'Path-of-Action' or the 'Way-of-Knowledge'
was the direct approach to the Infinite, the Eternal. His
question concludes, therefore, with a humble request:
186

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"Tell me that 'ONE' PATH by which, I, for certain, can
attain the Highest."
As a child of that age, there was no doubt, even in
Arjuna's mind, that life was not to be squandered away in
merely producing, acquiring, hoarding and spending
wealth. As a true child of Hinduism, he vaguely knew that
he had to fulfil a great cultural mission in the world, and
that material successes were only the means and not the
end, or the goal. Partha's doubt was only on how best he
could make use of the environments that presented
themselves to him so that he might carve out for himself a
greater cultural growth and a fuller spiritual unfoldment
in himself.
THE BLESSED LORD GIVES THE FOLLOWING REPLY
WHICH IS IN CONFORMITY WITH THE QUESTION:
The Blessed Lord said : 3. In this world there is a two-fold path,
as I said before, O sinless one; the 'Path-of-Knowledge' of the
SANKHYANS and the 'Path-of-Action' of the YOGINS.
To consider the 'Path-of-Action' (Karma Yoga) and the
'Path-of-Knowledge' (Jnana Yoga) as competitive is to
understand neither of them. They, being complementary,
are to be practised SERIALLY one after the other. Selfless
activity gives a chance to the mind to exhaust many of its
existing mental impressions. Thus purified, the mind
gains such a flight and ethereal poise that it can steadily
soar into the subtlest realms of meditation, and finally
187

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

come to gain the experience of the transcendental
Absolute.
Men belonging to foreign cultures find it very difficult to
understand Hinduism when they approach it with all
their native enthusiasm. They feel overwhelmed when
they read of such a variety of 'Paths' and seemingly
contradictory advices. But, to condemn Hinduism as
unscientific because of this, would be a mistake, as
colossal and as ludicrous as to say that medicine is no
science at all, since, for each patient, the same doctor
prescribes a different medicine, during a single afternoon!!
Religious men, men fit for spiritual discipline, fall under
two distinct categories: the active and the contemplative.
Temperamentally, these two classes fall so widely apart,
that to prescribe for both of them one and the same
technique for individual development, would be to
discourage one section and ignore its progress. The Geeta
is not merely a text-book of Hinduism but a Bible of
humanity. As such, in its universal application, it has to
show methods of self-development to suit the mental and
intellectual temperaments of both these categories.
Therefore, Krishna clearly explains here that the two-fold
path of Self-development was prescribed for the world-the
'Path-of-Knowledge' to the MEDITATIVE, and the 'Pathof-Action' to the ACTIVE. It is added that this
classification and careful prescription for the two different
188

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

types of men has been in existence from the very
beginning of creation.
For the first time, Lord Krishna is giving us here in this
stanza, a glimpse of the identity of the man who is the
author of the Geeta. If it were given out by the son of
Devaki, a mere mortal who lived in that age, he would at
best, have given us only an intellectual theory built
entirely upon the observed data. Observed data always
have a knack of changing, and when they change, the final
conclusions also must necessarily change. We have now a
hundred different political and economic philosophies,
and numberless scientific theories that have all become
outmoded when the social living conditions, or the
economic structure, or the collected and observed data
have changed in their set up, or in their imperative
messages. If the Geeta was the conclusion of a mere
mortal Krishna's intellect, the values of life preached
therein would also have got outmoded and by now
become fossilised!
Here, He clearly says that, at the very beginning of
creation, these two 'Paths' were prescribed by 'Me';
thereby indicating that Krishna is talking here not as the
Blue Boy of Vrindavana --- not as the Beloved of the gopis -- not as the great diplomat of His age --- but as a Man-ofRealisation, a Prophet, and a Seer, who lived in that
period of Indian history. It is neither as Arjuna's
charioteer, nor as a friend, nor as a well-wisher of the
Pandavas, that He is talking at this moment. Perfectly
189

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

identifying with the spiritual dignity in Himself,
experiencing His Absolute Nature, it is as the Eternal
substratum for the entire PLURALISTIC world, as the
Cause of all Creation, as the Might in all substances, that
He is talking now. Transcending all time and causation, in
a burning conviction of the lived Truth, He declares here:
"At the very beginning of creation, these two 'paths' were
given out by Me as the two possible methods by which the
ACTIVE and the CONTEMPLATIVE could seek and rediscover the Eternal nature of their very Self."
THE 'PATH-OF-ACTION' IS A MEANS TO AN END,
NOT DIRECTLY, BUT ONLY AS A PREPARATION TO
THE 'PATH-OF-KNOWLEDGE'; WHEREAS THE LATER,
WHICH IS ATTAINED BY MEANS OF THE 'PATH-OFACTION,' LEADS TO THE GOAL DIRECTLY WITHOUT
EXTRANEOUS HELP. TO SHOW THIS THE LORD
SAYS:
4. Not by non-performance of actions does man reach
'actionlessness' ; nor by mere renunciation does he attain
'Perfection. '
Spiritually, as the Self, everyone of us is All-full and
Perfect. Due to our 'ignorance'of this spiritual experience,
we entertain in our intellect unending desires, each of
them being our own intellect's attempt to fulfil itself! It is
very well-known that we desire things that are not already
with us in full, or in a satisfying quantity. As the desires in
us, so are our thoughts; thoughts are the disturbances
190

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

created in our mental zone by our desires. At every
moment, the texture and quality of our thoughts are
directly conditioned and controlled by our desires.
Thoughts in an individual, expressed in the outer worldof-objects, become his actions; actions are nothing other
than the actor's thoughts projected and expressed in the
world. Thus, in this chain-of-'ignorance,' constituted of
desires, thoughts, and actions, each one of us is caught
and bound.
If we observe them a little more closely, we find that these
are not so many different factors, but are, in fact, different
expressions of one and the same spiritual IGNORANCE.
This ignorance (Avidya), when it functions in the intellect,
expresses itself as DESIRES. When the desires, which are
nothing other than the 'ignorance,' function in the mental
zone, they express themselves as THOUGHTS. These
thoughts, when they express in the outer world, become
ACTIONS. Naturally, therefore, if the Supreme can be
defined as "the experience beyond ignorance," it must
necessarily be true that the Self is "the State of
"DESIRELESS-NESS"
or
"the
Condition
of
THOUGHTLESS-NESS" or "the Life of ACTIONLESSNESS."
By mere 'renunciation of action' (Samnyasa) no one attains
Perfection. Running away from life is not the way to reach
the highest goal of evolution. Arjuna's intention, you may
remember, was to run away from the war-front, and,
therefore, this misguided Hindu was to be re-educated in
191

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the right understanding of the immortal culture of the
Vedas. For this purpose was the Divine Song given out by
Krishna.
Through action, to a purification of the inner instrument,
applying which the seeker walks the 'Path-of-Knowledge'
to reach ultimately the spiritual destination of selfdevelopment as indicated in this stanza. Hence it has been
often quoted by all great writers on Hinduism.
FOR WHAT REASON, THEN, DOES A PERSON NOT
ATTAIN PERFECTION THAT IS FREE FROM
ACTIVITIES
BY
MERE
RENUNCIATION,
UNACCOMPANIED BY KNOWLEDGE? --- THE
REASON THUS ASKED FOR IS GIVEN AS FOLLOWS:
5. Verily, none can ever remain, even for a moment, without
performing action; for, everyone is made to act helplessly,
indeed, by the qualities born of PRAKRITI.
Man is ever agitated under the influence of the triple
tendencies of Unactivity (Sattwa), Activity (Rajas) and
Inactivity (Tamas) inherent in him. Even for a single
moment he cannot remain totally inactive. Total inactivity
is the character of utterly insentient matter. Even if we are
physically at rest, mentally and intellectually we are active
all the time, except during the state of deep-sleep. So long
as we are under the influence of these three mental
tendencies (gunas), we are helplessly prompted to labour
and to act.
192

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Therefore, not to act at all is to disobey the laws of nature
which shall, as we all know, bring about a cultural
deterioration in ourselves. If there is a creature who
remains inactive physically, he will get dissipated in his
thoughts. Therefore, the Geeta advises him to act
vigorously with a right attitude of mind, so that he may
avoid all internal waste of energy and learn to grow in
himself.
NOW, FOR HIM WHO KNOWS NOT THE SELF, IT IS
NOT RIGHT TO NEGLECT THE DUTY ENJOINED ON
HIM. SO THE LORD SAYS:
6. He who, restraining the organs-of-action, sits thinking in his
mind of the sense-objects, he, of deluded understanding, is called
a hypocrite.
To sit back physically retired is not the way to reach
anywhere, much less the final State of Perfection. If this
physical retirement is not efficiently accompanied by an
equal amount of mental and intellectual withdrawal from
the sensuous fields, the spiritual future of such a
misinformed seeker is surely very bleak and dreary.
The truth of this statement is very well supported by
modern text-books on psychology. To dissipate ourselves
with immoral or criminal thoughts is more harmful than
to physically indulge in them. The mind has a tendency to
repeat its own thoughts. When a single thought is
repeated off and on, it creates in the mind a deepening
193

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

impression, and afterwards all thoughts arising in the
mind irresistibly flow in that prepared channel. Once the
direction of the flow in the mind has become fixed, all
external activities of that individual become coloured by
this characteristic tendency. A mind that constantly
meditates on sensuous pleasures carves out for itself a
deep sensuous tendency and ere long we discover that the
individual is helplessly egged on to act in the external
world, as he had tragically planned for himself in his
mind.
To give physically a show of morality and ethics, while
mentally living a shameless life of low motives and foul
sentiments, is the occupation of a man who is not a seeker
of spiritual fulfilment, but, as is termed here, a selfdeluded hypocrite! Certainly we all know that, even if we
can physically discipline ourselves, it is not easy for an
average man to control the sensuous tendencies at his
mental level.
KRISHNA REALISES THAT AN ORDINARY MAN
WOULD NOT KNOW HOW TO SAVE HIMSELF FROM
THIS NATURAL INSTINCT AND, THEREFORE, HE
PRESCRIBES THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
7. But, whosoever, controlling the senses by the mind, O
Arjuna, engages his organs-of-action in KARMA YOGA,
without attachment, he excels.

194

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In these two innocent looking lines we have the entire
Science-of-Right-Action and the complete technique of
right living. The ECONOMICS OF THOUGHT is a science
unknown to the modern world while the thought
economists of yore carved out a Rishi-India and guided
the country to the golden era of its spiritual culture.
The mind is fed and sustained, nurtured and nourished by
the five organs-of-perception, with stimuli drawn from the
outer world of sense-objects. The mind in us, as it were,
flows out through the sense-organs, and when it comes in
contact with their respective objects, the sense-organs
perceive them. If the mind is not co-operating with the
sense-organs, perception is impossible, even though the
objects may be within the field of the organs. That is why
sometimes, when we are deeply attentive and fully
interested in reading a book, we do not hear even when
somebody calls us at our elbow. Examples can be
multiplied.
The prescription contained in this stanza asks a seeker to
control the sense-organs by the mind. This can be
effectively achieved only when the mind is given a
brighter and diviner field to roam about in. To control the
impetuosity of the mind with sheer will is like an attempt
to dam a river while it is in flood. It is destined to be a
futile attempt. Later on the Geeta will explain the
technique of this control.

195

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This control of the sense-organs by the mind is only the
negative aspect of the entire technique of right living.
Ordinarily, we spend a lot of our life-energies in the fields
of sense-objects. When the sense-organs are thus
controlled, we are conserving a large quantity of energy,
and unless this gathered energy is immediately given a
more profitable field of activity it is sure to break the
bounds and flood the inner world and, perhaps, sweep
away the entire personality equilibrium. The second line
of this stanza advises us what we should do with the
energies thus saved from their usual fields of dissipation.
The stanza says that these energies must be spent in
directing the seeker's organs-of-action to the appropriate
fields of activities. Even here, a very important precaution
has been lovingly advised by Krishna. The Karma Yogin
has been warned to act with perfect detachment.
When a camera is loaded with a piece of plain white
paper, however long we may keep the lenses open against
any well-lit object, no impression of the object concerned
can dirty the paper! On the other hand, if that very same
sheet of paper is sensitised, then, even a slight exposure
will leave the impressions of the object upon it. Similarly,
a mind plastered with attachment soon gathers on to itself
impressions (vasanas) during its contacts in the external
fields of activity. The Lord advises us to act without
attachment, so that, instead of gathering new impressions,
we may make use of our activities for the exhaustion of
the existing vasana-dirt in our mental equipment.
196

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The logical and scientific exposition of this theory is so
complete that, no student of the Geeta can discover in it
any loopholes for hesitation or doubt.
By withdrawing the organs-of-perception from their
unprofitable fields of activity, we save on the inner energy
which is spent through the organs-of-activity on a chosen
field of work; because of our inner attitude of nonattachment during the activity, no new rubbish is
gathered by our mind, but, on the contrary, it gets itself
burnished by the removal of its existing mental dirt. The
very field of activity which ordinarily becomes a snare to
capture and imprison a soaring, soul, itself becomes the
exact art of self-liberation, when it is rightly employed by
faithfully following the 'way-of-life' advised in the Geeta.
WHEREFORE:
8. You perform (your) bounden duty; for, action is superior to
inaction. Even the maintenance of the body would not be
possible for you by inaction.
In our work-a-day world, we must understand this term
'bounden duty' (Niyatam Karma) in the text, to include all
"obligatory actions" of an individual in his home, in his
office, and in the society as a national being. Thus, not to
perform diligently all our duties in the home and in the
world outside would be inaction. We are warned that
even a healthy bodily existence is not possible if we were
to live in complete inertia and inactivity. Inactivity brings
197

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

about the destruction of the nation, of the society, and of
the home, and often the very individual himself becomes
victimised by his own idleness and suffers physical
debilities and intellectual deterioration.
IT IS ALSO WRONG TO SUPPOSE THAT ACTIONS
LEAD TO BONDAGE AND THAT THEY SHOULD NOT,
THEREFORE, BE PERFORMED. --- WHY?
9. The World is bound by action other than those performed 'for
the sake of sacrifice' ; do thou, therefore, O son of Kunti, perform
action of that sake (for YAJNA ) alone, free from all
attachments.
Every action does not bring about bondages upon the
doer. It is only unintelligent activities that thicken the
impressions in the mind, and thus successfully build a
thick and impenetrable wall between the ego-centre and
the unlimited Divine-Spark-of-Life in us. Every action
motivated by ego-centric desires thickens the veil and
permits not even a single ray of the essential Divinity to
peep through it, to illumine the life in us. According to the
traditional translation, all activities other than the Yajnaactivities will bring about vasana-bondages, and the
individual's ultimate development and growth will be
arrested.
Yajna here means only "any self-sacrificing work,
undertaken in a spirit of self-dedication, for the blessing of
all." Such an action cannot be self-degrading and,
198

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

therefore, it is self-liberating. The following stanzas also
will become more and more clear, and universally
appropriate in their meaning, only when we understand
Yajna as "any social, communal, national, or personal
activity into which the individual is ready to pour himself
forth entirely in a spirit of service and dedication."
Only when people come forward to act in a spirit of cooperation and self-dedication, can the community get
itself freed from its shackles of poverty and sorrow. This is
a fact endorsed by history. And such activities can be
undertaken in a spirit of Divine loyalty, only when the
worker has no attachment. Arjuna's defect was that he got
too attached to the individuals in the opposing forces, and
he developed, consequently, wrong relationships with
them. Therefore, he came to feel that he must run away
from the field of work that had presented itself before
him.
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, ACTION
SHOULD BE DONE BY HIM, WHO IS QUALIFIED FOR
IT:
10. The PRAJAPATI (the Creator) , having in the beginning (of
creation) created mankind, together with sacrifices, said, "by
this shall you prosper; let this be the milch-cow of your desire --"KAMADHUK" (the mythological cow which yields all desired
objects) .

199

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Even when the Creator, the Total-mind, puts up the show
of the Universe of the Five Elements and brings forth the
living organisms along with man, on this stage of life to
work, to strive and to achieve, he creates also Yajna, "the
spirit of self-dedicated activities." The Yajna-spirit is seen
everywhere: the Sun shines, the Moon appears, the Sea
throbs, the Earth bears --- all in a spirit of sacrifice and
self-dedicated motherly love with never even a trace of
attachment or any kind of self-arrogating motives.
The whole world of cosmic powers, and nature's
phenomena function instinctively in the service of all.
Even before life could appear on the face of the earth, the
elemental forces had prepared the field with their constant
activities performed in the sacred spirit-of-dedication.
Even when life developed and multiplied, at all levels, we
can easily recognise different degrees of Yajna-activities,
which keep up the harmonious growth of existence.
The above idea, when poetically put, becomes this
pregnant stanza in the Geeta. The Creator created the
world along with the "spirit-of-service" and the "capacityfor-sacrifice." As it were, the Creator declared, "by this
spirit of self-sacrifice shall you multiply; this shall be the
milch-cow of your desires." Kamadhenu is a mythological
cow, supposed to have belonged to Sage Vasishta, from
which all our desires could be milked out. The term,
therefore, means only that no achievement is impossible
for man, if he knows how to act in the discipline of cooperation, and if he is ready to bring forth into his
200

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

activities the required amount of non-attachment and
spirit of sacrifice.
HOW CAN THIS BE ACHIEVED BY SACRIFICE?
11. With this, you do nourish the gods and may those DEVAS
nourish you; thus nourishing one another, you shall, attain the
Highest Good.
The whole Vedic concept of Devas is that of one Universal
Power, ever active in the world of phenomena, receiving
appropriate names because of Its multiple functions. All
Vedic gods are but functional names of the one Supreme
Creative Power manifesting in myriad forms.
In understanding the stanza in its more universal
application, we have to interpret the term Deva as the very
"presiding deity" in any field of activity, who blesses the
worker in that field with his profit. The deity that blesses
the worker in a field of activity can be nothing other than
"THE PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL" in that given field.
When we apply in any situation our true and sincere
work, the efforts and sacrifices so made, as it were, invoke
the 'PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL' in that situation, which
comes to manifest and bless the worker. This becomes
obvious when we try to understand what we, in the
modern world mean, when we say Mother India. In thus
symbolising the might of a nation we mean the
201

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

'PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL" of that country in all her
spheres of activities.
It is obvious that the productivity that is dormant in any
situation can be invoked only by man's sincere efforts.
This potential which generally lies dormant everywhere is
the Deva to be cherished by the worker through the Yajna
activities, and certainly the Deva will manifest itself to
cherish, or to bless the worker. "Thus cherishing one
another, man shall gain the Highest Good," is the Divine
intention in the mind of the creator, says Krishna in this
stanza.
The Law-of-Seva is faithfully followed by every sentient
and insentient member of the cosmos instinctively. Man
alone is given the freedom to act as he likes and to the
extent he disobeys this Universal Law-of-Sacrifice, Yajna,
to that extent he comes to suffer, because he, with his
arrogant and egoistic actions, brings discord in the
harmony of the existence around him.
MOREOVER:
12 "The DEVAS , nourished by the sacrifice, will give you the
desired objects. " Indeed he who enjoys objects, given by the
DEVAS , without offering (in return) to them, is verily a thief.
Here, Krishna repeats the unalterable ritualistic law "that
the Devas, cherished by Yajna, will provide us with the
202

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

desired objects." The truth of this statement becomes selfevident and clear when we re-read this statement
substituting our meaning for the terms Deva and Yajna.
The "productive potential" (Deva), when cherished
through "self-dedicated work performed in a spirit of
sacrifice" (Yajna), will provide the worker with the desired
objects. This is the law-of-life.
And when we thus earn a profit due to our sacrifices, we
have every right to enjoy that profit SHARING IT
AMONG OURSELVES. But no living creature should
enjoy benefits of others' actions without contributing his
own share to the total effort. In the capitalistic system of
life we notice the wrong tendency of self-aggrandisement
of profits produced out of the collective efforts of millions
of workers. This ultimately creates sad maladjustments in
all spheres of activity, and national and international
peace is threatened when we thus upset the law of
harmony in life. When this idea, familiar in modern
finance, "that a member of a society who consumes
without producing is a liability to the nation," is re-read in
the language of the Vedas, it is spelt as the second line of
this stanza.
HE WHO ENJOYS OBJECTS, GIVEN BY THE Devas, the
"productive potential tapped," without offering his own
Yajna-efforts into it, is termed here by Krishna as a 'social
thief.' Considering the moral and ethical idealism
recognised and respected at the time of the Geeta, the
term 'thief' used here is indeed a powerful word, fully
203

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

implying the low depravity and disrespectful nature of
such a social criminal who eats without producing.
ON THE OTHER HAND:
13. The righteous, who eat the "remnants of the sacrifices" are
freed from all sins; but those sinful ones, who cook food (only)
for their own sake, verily eat but sin.
As a contrast to such social criminals, feeding themselves
upon the social wealth, in producing which they have not
brought in any self-effort, in this stanza, we have the
good, who receive for themselves their "share," after
sweating hard in sincere Yajna-activities. Such people, as
explained here "go beyond all sins."
Sins of the past are the causes for the present pains, and
the present sins would be the causes for the future
sorrows. Thus, all causes for the sorrows in social life
would be, no doubt, removed, if the good and sociallyconscious members of a community were to feel satisfied
in enjoying the "remnants" of their co-operative work
performed in the true Yajna-spirit.
As a contrast to these, it has been declared that those who
cook food for themselves alone, "eat but sin." It seems that
Krishna is perfectly against private property, not in the
sense in which a communist would understand it. Krishna
seems to be against the principle of arrogation of wealth,
204

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and of hoarding the same, motivated by lust of lucre,
meant mainly for selfish enjoyment, utterly regardless of
the privations and poverty of the unfortunate folks
around in the community. It is said that such hoarders of
wealth "eat but sin."
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO, ACTION
SHOULD BE PERFORMED BY HIM WHO IS QUALIFIED
FOR ACTION. FOR, IT IS ACTION THAT SETS THAT
WHEEL OF THE UNIVERSE MOVING. HOW? THE
ANSWER FOLLOWS:
14. From food come forth beings; from rain food is produced;
from sacrifice arises rain, and sacrifice is born of action.
15. Know you that action comes from BRAHMAJI (the creator)
and BRAHMAJI come from the Imperishable. Therefore, the allpervading BRAHMAN (God-principle) ever rests in sacrifice .
The cosmic-wheel-of-cooperative-action is being narrated
here in the familiar language of the Vedas. The living
creatures are born out of food, and they are nourished by
food. The mineral-wealth of the world becomes
assimilable food --- both as vegetarian and non-vegetarian
--- only by the action of rain upon it. But for rains the
vegetables will not grow, and the lack of proper grazinggrounds is a danger to cattle-wealth. "Rains come as a
result of Yajna, and Yajnas are performed through human
action."
205

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This stanza may read strangely to those who are not ready
to bring the full shaft of their intelligence for the purpose
of understanding it. It is evident to any modern educated
man that living creatures are born out of matter. Matter is
rendered consumable and digestible, nutritive and
assimilable, only by the action of rains upon it. But the
difficulty in understanding the stanza is when we come to
the next assertion that "the rains come as a result of
Yajnas."
But in Krishna's words here, we are not warranted in
accepting that he is advising Arjuna to follow ritualism. In
this stanza, as also elsewhere all along the Geeta, the
familiar terms of the Vedic period has been charged with
new meanings and significances. "Rain" is the essential
condition for the conversion of the mineral-raw-material
into enjoyable and nutritive food. Similarly, in all fields of
activity there is "an enjoyable profit" which can be
gathered only when the fields come under "conditions
favourable" for them to produce those profits. "Selfdedicated activities" (Yajna), when performed in any given
field of endeavour, will be creating therein "conditions
necessary for the field to smile forth" (rain) in a luxurious
"crop of profit" (Annam), enjoyable by the society.
For example, the wasteful waters of a river flowing idly
can be dammed and made use of, if the waters are
intelligently employed in irrigating the fertile lands now
lying fallow on its banks. Through sacrifice and work
alone can the dam be built and when it is built, it provides
206

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"conditions helpful" for bringing the lands on either side
under the plough. Again, for making use of irrigated land,
man has yet to strive: ploughing, sowing, weeding,
waiting, gathering --- before he can come to enjoy the
profit of his activities, the food.
We are shown how this Wheel-of-Action (stanza-15), is
connected with and includes the Supreme. The principle
of right action, nay, even the power to act, has come out of
the Creator himself and the Creator is none other than the
Imperishable Supreme. Action IS in the new-born live
baby; action is a gift from the Creator! Therefore, the Allpervading Supreme is ever centred in all undertakings
pursued, by one or many people, in an honest spirit of
Self-dedication, for the good of all.
HE, WHO LIVES IN UNISON WITH THIS WHEEL-OFACTION, IS CONTRIBUTING TO THE HARMONY OF
LIFE. WHAT HAPPENS TO HIM WHO DISOBEYS?
16. He who does not follow here the wheel thus set revolving, is
of a sinful life, rejoicing in the senses. He lives in vain, O Son of
Pritha.
Every member in the entire kingdom of the minerals, the
vegetables and the dumb-creatures, instinctively follows
this principle of Yajna and contributes thereby to the
smooth running of the Universal-Wheel-of-Action.
Among living creatures, man alone has been allowed the
207

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

FREEDOM OF ACTION to contribute to the harmony, or
to bring about discord in the smooth running of this
cosmic mechanism. So long as the majority of a generation
manage to live abiding by the Law-of-Harmony they shall
grow from strength to strength, opening up fields of
happiness for themselves. Such periods are called the
golden eras of their social and cultural life.
But, this faithful obedience is not always possible, for all
of them, at all times. At certain periods of history, man, as
a social being, comes to revolt against this Eternal Law,
and then, life starts slipping away from its peaceful
domain of constructive growth, and shatters itself in
tearful ruin. Such ages are the dark ages of despair and
restlessness, war and pestilence, flood and famine.
The question naturally arises as to why the bright day of
the world slowly sets itself to bring in the dark night of
chaos. The explanation is given here in the Geeta.
A community is made up of its individuals. However
much we may glorify the achievements of the community
as such, we cannot totally ignore the contributions made
by the units constituting the community --- the
individuals. If the individuals are perfect, the community
works smoothly. But, if the units are wrongly composed,
then the entire healthy growth and strength of structure in
the total collapses. The individuals' negative existence
starts with their pre-occupation with their senses. In their
limited recognition that they are themselves nothing more
208

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

than their body, they become pre-occupied with its
nourishment and fattening. As a body, they cannot
perceive the Higher 'ways of life'; nor can they entertain
any goal other than seeking satisfactions for their mere
animal passions.
In such an era, nobody would come forward to work in
the redeeming noble spirit of Yajna, without which, no
"favourable circumstances" (rain), could be created for the
"productive potentials" (Devas) to manifest themselves as
nourishing joy. Seekers of sense (Indriya-ramah), they
compete among themselves, each seeking with lustful
greed, his own selfish happiness, and they, often
unconsciously, bring about a discordant rhythm in the
Wheel-of-Action. Such people are considered by the Geeta
as "living in sin," and the Divine Song asserts, "they live in
vain."
NOW THE LORD HIMSELF SUPPOSES ARJUNA TO
ASK THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS: "IS THE WHEELOF-ACTION, THUS SET IN MOTION, TO BE
FOLLOWED BY ALL, OR BY HIM ONLY WHO HAS
NOT YET ATTAINED FIRM FAITH IN THE PATH OF
KNOWLEDGE?"
17. But the man who rejoices only in the Self, who is satisfied
with the Self, who is content in the Self alone, for Him verily
there is nothing (more) to be done.
209

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Wheel-of-Action explained above is generally
applicable to the majority of seekers, and actions in the
world undertaken in a spirit of Yajna integrate their
personality and make them more and more prepared for
the highest vocation in life, meditation. Through selfless
work, an individual gains an increasing amount of inner
poise and when such a single-pointed mind is brought to
function at the meditation seat, the meditator gains the
experience of transcending his limited ego. To such a
perfected one, work is not a training to purify himself but
it is a fulfilment of his own God-realisation.
It is a fact that we are egged on to activity seeking and
demanding a better SATISFACTION and a complete
CONTENTMENT. Satisfaction and contentment are the
two wheels of the life-chariot. In order to gain a better
satisfaction and to reach nearer the point of contentment
we are goaded to act in the outer world, to earn and to
save, to hoard and to spend. But the man of perfection,
who on transcending his limited identification with his
matter-envelopments, when he gets himself ushered into
the All-perfect Realm of the Spirit, he comes to feel so
satisfied with the State of Self-hood which he thereby
attains, that he experiences a complete sense of
contentment in the very Divine Nature, and that provides
eternal satisfaction for him.
Where satisfaction and contentment have arrived, there, in
that bosom, desires cannot arise at all; and where the
desires are not, there cannot be any action. Thus, the
210

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

effects (Karya) are not possible in him; the effects of the
spiritual 'ignorance'and 'desires,' 'thoughts' and 'actions.'
Naturally, in such an individual there cannot be any
"obligatory duty"; all work has been at once fulfilled in
him. Thereafter, he is free to act, or not to act, to serve, or
not to serve, and lives as a God-man upon the earth.
MOREOVER:
18. For him there is here no interest whatever in what is done,
or what is not done; nor does he depend upon any being for any
object.
An ordinary man is whipped up to action either because
of his anxiety to gain a profit or because of his fear that by
not doing work he will be incurring a loss. But an
individual, who has the subjective experience of the
spiritual stature in him, who has, therefore, discovered an
Eternal satisfaction in his own Self, and who has reached
perfect contentment therein, will have no more action to
perform, for he has nothing more to gain through activity,
nor can he have any fear of losing anything in the world
due to non-performance of any action. Such an individual,
rooted in the experience of the Self, and depending upon
nothing --- neither any being nor any object --- for his joy
and bliss, has discovered the "Subject"; the objects-of-theworld are essentially nothing other than the "Subject,"
being tossed on the waves of agitations in the mind.
211

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

'YOU HAVE NOT ATTAINED TO THE RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE, ALL-PERVADING LIKE THE FLOOD
WATERS, (II-46) WHEREFORE":
19. Therefore, always perform actions which should be done,
without attachment; for, by performing action without
attachment, man attains the Supreme.
We have already noticed that Krishna pre-supposes no
knowledge in his friend, nor does he thrust upon Arjuna
bare statements that are to be blindly believed and silently
swallowed by him. Proselytisation is not the technique of
Vedanta. Hindus are strangers to it. Every strong statement
of fact is preceded by a line of logical thoughts explained
at length. Till now Krishna was explaining the 'wheel-ofaction,' and after exhausting the exposition of this entire
theory, he, in this stanza, is crystallising his conclusions
encouraging Arjuna to act.
Therefore, always perform actions which are obligatory in
your present social status, in your domestic situation, as a
member of your community and the nation. Even here,
Krishna is repeating his warning to Arjuna that he must
be careful in all his activities, to keep his mind away from
all dangerous "attachments." The Lord has already
explained how "attachments" directly help to form
tendencies in the mind and deepen fresh vasanaimpressions within.
212

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS
SHOULD PERFORM ACTION":

ALSO

YOU

20. Janaka and others attained Perfection verily by action only;
even with a view to protecting the masses you should perform
action.
Thus, the wise Kings of yore, such as Janaka and
Ashwapati, had tried to attain Perfection, (Samsiddhi), by
the 'Path-of-Action.' They were men of right
understanding as they tried to liberate themselves
through right actions performed in a spirit of detachment
and self-dedication. They had set an example to the world
by their achievement through an immaculate life of
service.
Krishna means that Arjuna too, a prince by birth, and one
who has taken upon himself the entire responsibility of
mobilising and fighting the war, should respect his
Prarabdha and act diligently without running away from
the battle-field as he had earlier intended to do. This is the
only method by which he can gain a complete vasanaexhaustion in himself. Born as a king, he had a greater
responsibility towards the community, than any other
member. Therefore, it was his duty that he should keep to
his post and work diligently.
A creeper will never grow in a desert. It is nature's law
that every living creature finds itself in the most
213

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

conducive outerworld conditions. Thus viewed, because
of the very fact that he had manifested himself as a son of
his father in the family of kings, nature had judged that
the most conducive circumstance in life for Arjuna was
the life of a prince, daring dangers, fighting enemies, and
generally ordering peaceful and progressive growth for
the society.
"WHO SHOULD SECURE THE WELFARE OF THE
WORLD? AND HOW?" THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:
21. Whatever a great man does, that other men also do (imitate)
; whatever he sets up as the standard, that the world (people)
follows.
Man is essentially an imitating animal. This is a
psychological truth. The moral rejuvenation of a society in
any period of history can take place only because of the
example set up by the leaders of that nation. Students can
be disciplined only when teachers are well-behaved; the
minor officials cannot be kind and honest when the rulers
of the country are corrupt tyrants. Children's behaviour
depends entirely upon, and is ever controlled by, the
standard of purity and culture of their parents.
With this Krishna raises his next argument on why Arjuna
should act in the world. Unless he diligently acts, the
chances are that the entire community will follow the low
standard of retreat from action set up by him and thus
214

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

they will ultimately invite a general decadence of culture
in life.
Now, to emphasise the point and to make a lasting
impression upon Arjuna of the teaching so far given (III-4
to 21), Lord Krishna indicates himself as an example. The
Lord, though already a liberated soul (Mukta), is acting
diligently, without attachment, as a model, for his
generation to rise up above the slothfulness of the age into
vigorous activity.
The very creed of Krishna is "active resistance to evil." His
non-violence is not the instinctive incapacity of the daydreaming coward who cannot stand up against injustice
and fight for the accepted principles of national culture.
There could not have been any doubt now left in the mind
of Arjuna regarding the efficacy of the 'Path-of-Action'
advised to him.
"IF YOU HAVE A DOUBT AS REGARDS THE
NECESSITY FOR WORKING FOR THE PROTECTION
OF THE MASSES, WHY DO YOU NOT OBSERVE ME?
WHY DO YOU NOT FOLLOW MY EXAMPLE, AND TRY
TO PREVENT THE MASSES FROM GOING ASTRAY,
SETTING UP FOR THEM AN EXAMPLE IN
YOURSELF?"

215

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

22 There is nothing in the three worlds, O Partha, that has to be
done by Me, nor is there anything unattained that should be
attained by Me; yet, I engage Myself in action.
Being a Perfect-Man, a true Yogi, Krishna had no more
desire for achieving or gaining anything in the world. Had
He wanted a kingdom all for Himself, He could have
easily carved out one, but He was in the battle-front only
with a sense of duty towards the noble and the righteous
cause the Pandavas stood for.
The life of the Lord till the very moment of the
Mahabharata war had been a perfect life of complete
detachment and even then --- even though there was
nothing He had not gained, nor had He anything further
to gain --- He was spending Himself constantly in activity,
as though work was to Him a rapturous game of
enthusiasm and joy.
CONTINUING THE SAME ARGUMENT, THE LORD
SAYS:
23. For, should I not ever engage Myself in action, without
relaxation, men would in every way follow My Path, O son of
Pritha.
Why should the Lord work? What would be the loss to the
generation if He were not to work at all? The masses
always imitate their leaders and heroes in their dress, in
216

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

their behaviour, in their moral values, in their actions, in
all the branches of their activities. They fix their measure
of perfection always by watching the standard of life of
their leaders. If the Lord did not continue to work without
relaxation, men also would follow in His wake and sink
themselves into inactivity and so into an unproductive
existence. In nature everything acts constantly and
sincerely. The entire Universe survives and sustains itself
by activity.
In these stanzas, as everywhere, all along in the Geeta, the
first person singular is used by Lord Krishna, not in the
sense of the Blue Boy of Vrindavana, but as the Atman, or
the Self-realised Man-of-Perfection. A liberated soul
realises himself to be nothing other than the Spirit, upon
which alone is the play of matter sustained, as the dream
is sustained upon the waker. If this God-principle, though
inactive in Itself, does not consistently serve the pluralistic
phenomenal world as its permanent substratum, the
world as it is now, cannot exist. The ocean never rises, in
spite of the billows. Yet, it is a fact that without the ocean
the waves cannot rise or dance. Similarly, if the Lord were
not to keep on activity serving the world, the cultural life
of the generation would stagnate.
"AND WHAT HARM IS THERE IF I DO NOT ACT?"...
THE LORD SAYS:

217

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

24. These worlds would perish if I did not perform action; I
would be the author of confusion of "castes, " and would destroy
these beings.
If I do not perform action, it will not be conducive to the
harmonious progress of the Universe, and the entire
super-structure of our scientific laws and calculations will
tumble down. The Universe is not a chaos; it is a cosmos.
Lawless-ness is not noticed anywhere in the working of
the cosmic forces.
The phenomenal happenings, the movement of the
planets, the rhythmic dance of the seasons, the music of
creation, the law of colours are all happening in a
harmony, implicitly obeying the law governing them all,
and this Law is otherwise called the Mighty Power of
Nature, or God. Lord Krishna, as an embodiment of Godhood, is declaring here: "If I do not perform work, the
world would perish." Scientifically viewed, this
declaration is not a superstitious absurdity, acceptable
only to the blind believers, but it becomes a statement of
fact, which even the microscope-gazers cannot honestly
deny.
The Lord represents not only the law governing the outer
world of things and beings, but He is also the Law that
governs the inner world of thoughts and emotions. The
whole human society is divided into the four "castes"
(Varna), by the Hindu saints and sages, ON THE BASIS
OF THE INDIVIDUALS' MENTAL TEMPERAMENTS. In
218

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

case the law governing the inner psychological
temperaments is not functioning strictly, there will be
confusion in behaviour and instability in character. The
general translation "admixture of races" for "VarnaShankara" contains a mischievous suggestion for the
modern students inasmuch as they would directly
understand it as a Divine sanction for the "caste-tyrannies"
that are going on in the decadent Hindu society.
"SUPPOSE, ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU, ARJUNA,
THINK --- OR SUPPOSE, FOR THAT MATTER, ANY
OTHER MAN THINKS --- THAT ONE WHO HAS
ACHIEVED HIS GOAL OF SELF-REALISATION, EVEN
HE SHOULD WORK FOR THE WELFARE OF THE
OTHERS, ALTHOUGH FOR HIMSELF HE MAY HAVE
NOTHING MORE TO ACHIEVE OR GAIN"...
25. As the "ignorant" men act from attachment to action, O
Bharata, so should the "wise" men act without attachment,
wishing the welfare of the world.
It is very well known that all of us act in our own given
fields of activities with all enthusiasm and deep interest,
all day through, every day of the year and all through the
years of our entire life-time. An average member of
society is seen to wear himself out in the strain of constant
activity. Irrespective of his health, careless of the severity
of seasons, through joy and sorrow, man constantly strives
to earn and to hoard, to gain and to enjoy.
219

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here Krishna says that a Man-of-Self-realisation also
works in the world with as much diligence and sincerity,
tireless enthusiasm and energizing joy, burning hopes and
scalding fears, as any ordinary man striving in the
competitions of the market-place. The only difference
between the two is that, while the ignorant acts and is
motivated in his actions by his "attachments and anxieties
for the fruits," a man of Godly intentions or complete
Perfection will work in the world, without attachment,
only for the purpose of the redemption of the world.
This subtle difference between the activities of the "wise"
and the "ignorant" may not strike the modern reader as
very important unless his attention is directed towards its
universal application. It is the anxious "desire for the
fruits" that dissipates the finer and nobler energies in the
worker, and condemns his activity to utter failure. No
doubt, even a Man-of-God, when he acts, must bring into
his field of activity his own mind and intellect.
The mind can function only when it is attached to
something. It cannot remain alive, and yet, detached from
every thing. "Detachment of the mind" mentioned here is
only its "detachment from the FALSE irresistible
fascination for objects" and this is gained through the
process of "attaching itself to the NOBLER." Thus, when
Lord Krishna says
here, that the "wise" man should work "without
attachments" he immediately indicates how this can be
220

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

achieved. He advises Arjuna to act, "Desirous of guiding
the world"
(Loka-sangraha).
Attachment becomes a clog or a painful chain on us only
when it is extremely ego-centric. To the extent we work
for larger schemes to bless a vaster section of humanity, to
that extent the attachment loses its poison and comes to
bless the age. Many poisons serve as medicines in their
diluted form, while the same in a concentrated form can
bring instantaneous death! The ego and ego-centric
desires bind and destroy man, but to the extent he can lift
his identifications to include and accommodate in it,
larger sections of the living world, to that extent the
attachment gathers an ethical halo, a divine glow, and
becomes a cure for our subjective pains and imperfections.
Here the practical method suggested is that Arjuna should
work, unattached to his own ego-centric, limited concept
of himself and his relations, and he must enter into the
battle-field as a champion fighting for a cause, noble and
righteous, against the armies that have come up to
question and challenge the deathless 'values of higher
living' as propounded and upheld by the Hindu culture.
TO SUCH A MAN-OF-WISDOM WHO IS WORKING IN
SOCIETY FOR THE SERVICE OF MAN, THE
FOLLOWING ADVICE IS GIVEN:
221

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

26. Let no wise-man unsettle the minds of ignorant-people, who
are attached to action; he should engage them in all actions,
himself fulfilling them with devotion.
The chances are that when a man of equipoise and Selfdiscovery enters the field of activity, he will be tempted to
advise his generation on pure ethics and abstract
ideologies. The generation, misunderstanding the words
and emphasis of such a Master, might come to a wrong
conclusion that, to renounce activity was the direct path to
Truth. The teachers are warned against such a hasty
guidance which might damp the enthusiasm of the
generation to act.
Life is dynamic. Nobody can sit idle. Even the idler
contributes to the general activity. In this ever-surging
onward rush of life's full impetuosity, if there be a foolish
guide who would plunge himself in the mid-stream and
stand with upraised hands, howling to the generation to
halt, he would certainly be pulverized by the ever-moving
flood of life and its endless activities. Many a hasty Master
has made this mistake and has had to pay for it. Krishna is
declaring here only a Universal law for the guidance of
the saints and sages of India that they should not go
against the spirit of the times and be a mere revolt against
life's own might and power.
In this stanza is given out the art of guiding mankind,
which can be used by every leader in all societies, be they
222

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

social workers, or political masters, or cultural teachers. A
society, that is functioning in a particular line of activity at
any given period of history, should not be, all of a sudden,
arrested in its flow, says Krishna, but the leader should
fall in line with the generation, and slowly and steadily
guide it to act in the right-direction, by his own example.
A traveller motoring with the idea of going to Hardwar
may miss his way and speed down towards Saharanpur,
but the way to guide him back to the main road is not to
halt him; because, by halting, he will never reach his own
destination, or any other goal. So long as the wheels are
not revolving on the road, distances are not covered.
Keeping the wheels on the move, he has to change the
direction of his movements until he comes to his right
path, heading towards Hardwar.
Similarly, man should act and even if he be acting in the
WRONG DIRECTION, through action alone can he come
to the RIGHT PATH of diviner activities, and gain the
fulfilment of his Perfection. No 'wise'-man should unsettle
his generation's firm faith in action. He must himself
diligently perform the ordinary actions in a diviner and
better fashion, and he must make himself an example to
the world, so that the lesser folk may automatically
imitate him and learn to follow his unfailing footsteps.
IN WHAT WAY IS AN 'IGNORANT MAN ATTACHED
TO ACTION?
223

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

27. All actions are performed, in all cases, merely by the
Qualities-in-Nature (GUNAS ) . He whose mind is deluded by
egoism, thinks "I am the doer. "
All along Krishna has been insisting that nobler actions
are actions without attachment. This is easier said than
done. Even if one intellectually accepts this idea, it is not
at all easy for him to act up to it. To everyone of us the
difficulty is that we know not how to get ourselves
detached from our activities, and still act on in the field.
The Lord gives here a method of discrimination by which
we can easily develop the required amount of detachment.
We had explained earlier how spiritual IGNORANCE
expresses itself at the intellectual level as DESIRES, which
again, in the mental zone, manifests as THOUGHTS, and
the very thoughts, coloured by our mental tendencies,
manifest themselves, in their fulfilment in the outer
world-of-objects, as our ACTIONS. Thus, the tendencies of
the mind (vasanas) express in the outerworld as actions.
Where there are noble-thoughts, there, noble-actions
manifest. When the thoughts are agitated, the actions also
are uncertain, faltering, and confused. And where the
thoughts are dull and animalistic, the actions generated
from them are also correspondingly base, vicious, and
cruel. Thus, the mind's projections in the outer-world are
in fact a kind of crystallisation of the mental Vasana
among the objects of the world and these constitute the
"actions."
224

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Where there is a mind, there actions also must be
performed. These actions are therefore GENERATED by
the mind, STRENGTHENED in the mind and ultimately
PERFORMED with the mind. But the individual, due to
his wrong identification with his own mind, gets the false
notion that he himself is the "actor" --- the "doer." This
action-arrogating-ego naturally starts feeling an anxiety
for its success and a burning attachment for the result of
its actions.
In a dream, we create a world of our own and we identify
ourselves with the world so made, and this IDENTIFIER is
called the 'dreamer.' We all know that the sorrows of the
dream all belong to the 'dreamer' and to no one else. The
'dreamer' is liberated from his pains when he ends his
identification with the dream kingdom. Similarly, the
actions in the world outside, which are nothing other than
the vasanas existing in one's own mind, cannot of
themselves give one any attachment, but the attachment is
felt by one who gets identified with one's own mental
conditions. The moment one understands this simple fact,
all one's attachments end, and therefore, one lives in
perfect peace.
This identification with the mental condition creates the
false sense of ego which arrogates to itself the idea: "I am
the doer." The "doer" demands the FRUITS OF HIS
ACTION. To get over this attachment is to end this
misconception.
225

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

BUT AS REGARDS THE 'WISE' MAN:
28. But he --- who knows the Truth, O mighty-armed, about the
divisions of the qualities and (their) functions, and he who
knows that GUNAS -as-senses move amidst GUNAS -asobjects, is not attached.
As a contrast to the point-of-view of the 'ignorant' man
explained in the last stanza, Krishna explains here the
attitude of the 'wise' man when he ploughs the field of
activity. In him, attachment has no place, because of his
constant, discriminating understanding that in all
activities, it is his mind that projects out to form the action.
When once the 'wise' man has realised that actions belong
to the world of the mind, he is no more anxious for the
fruits thereof. Success and failure thereafter belong to the
mind and not to him. Likes and dislikes thereafter are of
the mind and not his. Loves and hatreds are not his but of
the mind. Thus, in complete inner freedom the God-man
functions, as a true sportsman in his play-field, where the
very enjoyment is in the sport and not in the score.
Here, Arjuna is addressed as the 'mighty-armed,' and this
is very significant in the mouth of Krishna at this moment.
The very term reminds us of Arjuna's wondrous heroism
as the greatest archer of his time. The implication is that a
true hero is not one who can face an army and kill a few,
but one who can save himself. A true warrior is only he
who can tirelessly fight in the inner world, and gain a
226

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

victory over his own mind and attachments. One who can
act in the world's battle-field of actions, ever ruling over
and never surrendering to the arrows of attachments that
fly towards one from all directions, is the real Immortal
Hero, who can thereafter sit unarmed on the chariots of
mortal heroes, and without raising any weapon, can guide
the destinies of many an army in every Kurukshetra! That
Master Hero is called Tattwavit --- one who "knows" the
Reality --- the Self.
NOW:
29. Those deluded by the qualities of nature, (GUNAS) , are
attached to the functions of the qualities. The Man-of-PerfectKnowledge should not unsettle the 'foolish, ' who are of
imperfect knowledge.
Although many know that all actions are the attempts of
the mental impressions to fulfil themselves in the outer
world, only the Perfect-one realises this Truth and
generally becomes quiet and unattached in all his
activities. The majority of us are in a state of complete
delusion and are entirely victimised by our own mental
temperaments. The flood of life, surging out through these
existing vasana-channels, should not be blockaded in the
activity. The advice given by Krishna in the earlier stanza
(26) is, again for the purpose of emphasis, repeated here in
different words.
227

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The dull-witted one, unconsciously victimised by his own
mental impressions, acts in the world outside shackled by
a thousand burning attachments. A sage or a saint should
not come into the arena of life to decry such a man's
activities all of a sudden. Krishna's suggestion is that,
while feeding the fire of life, he should carefully guide its
flow into the right channel wherein the flood of life can
reach to water the gardens of cultural development in the
individual as well as in the community.
"HOW THEN SHOULD ACTIONS BE PERFORMED BY
THE 'IGNORANT' MAN WHO SEEKS LIBERATION
FROM HIS OWN SENSE OF FINITUDE, WHEN HE IS
QUALIFIED ONLY FOR ACTION?" THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:
30. Renouncing all actions in Me, with the mind centered on the
Self, free from hope and egoism (ownership) , free from (mental)
fever, (you) do fight!
It has been clearly declared that the Divine opinion of the
Lord is that Arjuna should fight. The Pandava prince is
not, at present, fit for the higher contemplative life of pure
meditation. Action has a tendency to create new
impressions which again procreate impulses to act more
vigorously. In order to avoid creation of new Vasanas even
while acting for the purpose of Vasana-exhaustion,
Krishna had already advised the method of acting without
the spirit of ego, or ego-centric desires. The same theory is
228

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

explained here while expounding a technique by which
this consummation can actually be brought about.
RENOUNCE ALL ACTIONS IN ME --- We have already
noticed that by the first-person pronoun Krishna means
the Supreme Self, the Divine, the Eternal. Renouncing all
activities unto Him, with a mind soaked with devoted
remembrances of the Self (Adhyatma Chetasa), the Lord
advises Arjuna to act on. Renunciation of action does not
mean an insipid life of inactivity. Actions performed
through attachment and desires are renounced the
moment we take away from action the ego-centric and the
selfish stink.
A serpent is dangerous only as long as its fangs are not
removed. The moment these are taken out, even the most
poisonous reptile becomes a tame creature incapable of
harming anyone. Similarly, action gives rise to bondage
only when it is performed with a heart laden with selfishdesires. Actions performed without desires are not actions
at all, inasmuch as they are incapable of producing any
painful reactions. Here, the renunciation of action only
means the giving up of the wrong motives behind the
actions.
The purification of the motives is possible only when the
mind is made to sing constantly the Divine Songs praising
the glories of the Self. In the song of Truth the heart begins
to throb with the highest Divine impulses. Actions
performed in the outer world by such an individual are no
229

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

more the ordinary actions but they become expressions of
the Supreme Will through that individual. When the
limited ego is replaced by the constant feeling of the Lord
--- as "I am the Supreme" --- such an individual becomes
the most efficient instrument for the expression of the
Divine Will.
Not only is it sufficient that we renounce thus all wrong
actions, but we have also to make a few adjustments in
our inner instruments in order to bring out an
unobstructed flow of the Creator's Will through us. These
are indicated here by the two terms "without hope" and
"without ego."
A superficial study of the stanza is sure to confuse the
student and drive him to the dangerous conclusion that
Hinduism preaches, not a dynamic conscious life, but an
insentient existence through life in a spirit of cultivated
hopeless-ness! But a closer study of the import of these
two terms will make us understand clearly that, in this
stanza, Krishna is hinting at a great psychological truth of
life!
WITHOUT HOPE --- Hope is "the expectation of a
happening that is yet to manifest and mature in a
FUTURE PERIOD OF TIME." Whatever be the hope, it
belongs not to the present; it refers to a period of time not
yet born.

230

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WITHOUT EGO --- Our ego-centric concept of ourselves
is nothing but "a bundle of happenings and achievements
of ours which took place, or were gained, in the past
moments." Ego is therefore "the shadow of the past," and
it has an existent reality only with reference to THE DEAD
MOMENTS OF THE PAST.
If hope is thus the child of the unborn future, ego is the
lingering memory of a dead past. To revel in ego and hope
is an attempt on our part to live, either with the dead
moments of the past, or with the unborn moments of the
future. All the while, the tragedy is that we miss the
'present,' the active dynamic 'present,' which is the only
noble chance that is given to us to create, to advance, to
achieve, and to enjoy. Krishna advises Arjuna, therefore,
to act renouncing both hope and ego; and this is indeed a
primary instruction on how to pour the best that is in us
into the 'present,' blockading all unintelligent and
thoughtless dissipation of our inner-personality-energies,
in the 'past' and the 'future.'
The instruction is so exhaustive in vision, and complete in
its minutest details, that the stanza under review should
be a surprise even to the best of our modern
psychologists. Even though the technique so far advised
can, and does, avoid all wastage of energy among the
funeral pyres of the dead moments and in the wombs of
unborn Time, yet, there is a chance for the man of action
wasting his potentialities in the very 'present.' This
generally comes through our inborn nature to get
231

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ourselves unnecessarily over-anxious during our present
activities. This FEVERISH ANXIETY is indicated here by
the term "fever" (Jwara). Krishna advises that Arjuna
should renounce all actions unto the Lord and, getting rid
of both hope and selfishness, must fight, free from all
mental fever. How complete this technique is will be
evident now to all students of the Geeta.
The term "fight" is to be understood here "as our
individual fight with circumstances, in the silent battle of
life." Thus, the advice is not for Arjuna alone, but to all
men who would like to live life fully and intelligently!
The advice contained in this stanza reads as though quite
unorthodox for those who have read the Vedas, with a
limited meaning for its term "Karma-Yoga."
IN
ORDER
TO
HAMMER
THIS
NEW
INTERPRETATION OF THE VEDIC TRUTH INTO THE
ACCEPTANCE OF HIS GENERATION, THE LORD
SAYS:
31. Those men who constantly practise this teaching of Mine,
full of faith and without cavilling, they too are freed from
actions.
It is clearly brought out here that the above technique can
bless us not by a mere study of it, but only when it has
been properly practised in life. The term religion (matam)
232

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in Sanskrit, means 'opinion.' This is "Krishna's opinion" --Sri Krishna's Matam. The philosophy of spirituality is
universal and, therefore, the same everywhere. But
religions differ from prophet to prophet, because there are
many different OPINIONS entertained by these different
Masters, regarding the best manner by which their
particular generations could be guided towards the final
experience of the Eternal-Factor.
One ought not to live through life as a mere beast of
burden doing its daily routine and sweating under the
driver's whip. Work only hardens the muscles; it can
smoothen out the ugly wrinkles in our character and add
a glow of health and vitality to our inner personality only
when we bring the inner equipments of our heart and
head into the work which our hands and legs perform in
the outer world. This is accomplished by pursuing the
Karma Yoga advised earlier, with full faith (Shraddha) and
without cavilling (Anasuyantah).
FAITH (Shraddha) --- is a very pregnant word in Sanskrit
which refuses to be defined fully by any single word in
English.
But Shankara's explanation of Shraddha has a purely
intellectual import and it has no direct emotional appeal
for the seeker. "Faith" in Vedanta means the ability to
digest mentally, and comprehend intellectually, the full
import of the advice of the Saints and the declarations of
the Scriptures. In fact without "faith" no activity is ever
233

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

possible; and "faith" cannot grow where intellectual
convictions have not come to play in their full blaze.
WITHOUT CAVILLING (Anasuyantah) --- A mere
intellectual theory cannot be understood and appreciated
without our adverse criticisms of it. We criticise to know
and understand more exhaustively a piece of knowledge.
But here, Krishna is advising a technique of living which
cannot fulfil itself in our life through mere criticism and
questioning. Krishna is warning Arjuna that he will
neither understand fully, not come to gain the blessings of
that Way-of-Life, by deep study and noisy discussions. It
can be understood and experienced ONLY by living it.
THEY TOO ARE FREED FROM WORK --- Immature
students of the Geeta have been seen to cool down in their
enthusiasm when they meet with the use of such terms.
All through the chapter Krishna was insisting that man
should act --- act diligently and rightly. All of a sudden He
points to a strange-looking goal, WORKLESSNESS.
Naturally, an intelligent reader immediately comes to feel
a disgust at this ugly paradox. This is mainly because of
our lack of appreciation of the term in its native Scriptural
import.
Earlier we have explained how the IGNORANCE of our
Spiritual Nature gives rise to DESIRES, which in their turn
cause THOUGHT-AGITATIONS, and also how WORK is
nothing other than thoughts fulfilled among the senseobjects. Thus, the "State of Workless-ness," is itself the
234

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"State of Thoughtless-ness," which indicates the
"Condition of Desireless-ness." Absence of all desires can
come only when we rediscover the All-full Nature of the
Self. In short, with the Knowledge of the Self, when
spiritual "ignorance" is terminated, desires can no more
arise. Thus, the term "FREED FROM WORK" indicates the
state beyond "ignorance," or the State of Self-hood.
This Supreme State, no doubt, can never be reached
purely through work. Parliament Street is not the
Parliament; but having reached Parliament Street, the
Parliament cannot be very far away; one cannot miss
reaching the Parliament there. Similarly, Karma Yoga is
extolled here as the "Path" that takes one ultimately to the
Supreme, because through desireless activity one achieves
Vasana-purgation, thus making the mind purer and
subtler for meditative purposes.
AS CONTRASTED WITH THE ABOVE, SHRI KRISHNA
EXPLAINS WHAT HAPPENS TO THOSE WHO CARP
AT THIS THEORY OF RIGHT ACTION:
32. But those who carp at My teaching and do not practice it,
deluded in all knowledge, and devoid of discrimination, know
them to be doomed to destruction.
"Those who decry this great teaching of Mine and do not
practise it," Krishna warns His students, "will become
235

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

more and more
discrimination."

deluded

and

will

lose

their

Man is encouraged to follow a life-of-action, only when he
comes to appreciate that Way-of-Life completely in his
understanding. When the very theory is decried, it is no
longer conducive to the intellect to accept it. Thus,
decrying a philosophy is a sign of one's intellectual
rejection of it. Having once rejected intellectually, there is
no chance of an individual ever striving to live that
philosophy. Karma Yoga is a way-of-life, and we have to
live it if we want to come under its grace.
The Path-of-Work lies through a process of elimination of
the desires in us. When the ego and ego-centric desires are
eliminated, the work accomplished through such an
individual is the true divine action, which is destined to
having enduring achievements. To the extent man is NOT
practising this efficient Way-of-Work, he would grow
necessarily unintelligent, and to that extent, his
discriminative capacity will deteriorate and ultimately get
destroyed.
The blessing, because of which man is considered superior
to animals, is his divine faculty of discrimination. An
intellect, strengthened by its own intrinsic capacity to
distinguish between the Real and the unreal, the right and
the wrong, is the mighty instrument of self-development
in man. When this instrument is destroyed, man comes to
behave in no better way than a biped animal; panting on
236

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the path of existence, bullied by its own lower instincts of
miserable passions and low appetites. Naturally, he fails
to make any true gain out of his life's chances, and finally
destroys himself.
THEN WHY DO NOT MEN FOLLOW THIS DOCTRINE
AND PERFORM THEIR DUTIES FULLY? WHY SHOULD
THEY FOLLOW OTHERS, OR ACT ON THEIR OWN? IN
DISOBEYING KRISHNA, WHY ARE THEY NOT
AFRAID
OF
TRANSGRESSING
THE
LORD'S
COMMANDS? THE LORD SAYS:
33. Even a wise man acts in accordance with his own nature;
beings will follow their own nature; what can restraint do?
Even the man-of-knowledge acts in conformity with his
own nature, which is determined by the pattern of
thoughts that arise in him. At any given instant of time,
each one of us is determined by the thoughts that are in us
at that moment; and the thoughts in us always get
patternised by the channels of thinking, designed by the
thoughts which we had entertained in the past. The nature
of each individual is decided by the style of thinking
which each is capable of.
The man-of-knowledge mentioned here indicates one who
has read and understood thoroughly the "technique of
action" as explained in this chapter. Even when he knows
the technique, the Lord says that it is not easy for him to
237

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

follow it, because his mind is designed to carry his
thoughts through ego-centric and selfish channels, ever
panting to gain some desires. Because of these past
impressions (vasanas), even an honest student finds it hard
to practise this simple-looking technique in his life. The
reason is quite universal: "BEINGS FOLLOW THEIR
OWN NATURE." Naturally "WHAT CAN RESTRAINT
DO" when nature is too powerful?
This last statement in the stanza "WHAT CAN
RESTRAINT DO?" is not a cry of despair in Krishna's
philosophy, but it is the honest all-seeing vision of the
philosopher in Krishna, who recognises that the higher
ways of living are not meant for all. Men crowding on the
lowest rung of the evolutionary ladder, overwhelmed by
their own animal passions, find themselves incapable of
renouncing them, and are, therefore, incapacitated to walk
the Path-of-Action. It is only a slightly evolved entity, full
of enthusiasm, activity and a passion for progress (Rajoguna), who can follow this sacred "path" and benefit
himself. This honest confession shows the broadmindedness and tolerance of Krishna, the Universal
Teacher.
IF EVERY BEING ACTS ONLY ACCORDING TO HIS
OWN NATURE --- AND THERE IS NONE THAT HAS
NOT A NATURE OF HIS OWN --- THEN, THERE IS NO
SCOPE FOR PERSONAL EXERTION AND THE
TEACHING BECOMES PURPOSELESS. THE LORD
EXPLAINS AS FOLLOWS:
238

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

34. Attachment and aversion for the objects of the senses abide
in the senses; let none come under their sway; for they are his
foes.
In the last stanza, it is said that, even a man, well-read in
the Shastras, cannot easily follow the highly ethical life
which is demanded of a spiritual seeker, because his lower
nature proves too strong for him. Prescribing a medicine
which is not available, is not the art of healing. It is the
philosopher's duty, not only to indicate the weaknesses in
our present life and the State-of-Perfection, but he must
also show us ways and means by which we can transport
ourselves from our weaknesses into this ideal State-ofPerfection. Then, and then alone, can the philosopher
bless his generation.
Krishna indicates here the great robber in the 'within' of
man, which loots away the true joys and thrills of 'right
living.' Attachments and aversions of the sense-organs for
their respective sense-objects are instictive, and natural, in
every one. The sense-objects by themselves are incapable
of bringing any wave of sorrow or agitation into the
'within.' We get agitated and disturbed not at our senseorgans, but in our mind. The mind gets disturbed because,
when the stimuli reach the mind, it accepts, in its inherent
mischief, certain types of stimuli as GOOD, and their
opposites as BAD. Thereafter, it gets attached to the
stimuli it experiences as good and develops an aversion
for the opposite type of stimuli. Now the mind is prepared
239

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

to suffer the agonies of existence in the sorrowful
plurality. Whenever it comes in contact with the infinite
number of objects outside, it pants to court the things of
its own attachment and labours to run away from the
things of its own aversion. This excitement of the mind is
truly 'its tragedy.'
Having stated this Truth, Krishna advises all seekers:
"LET NONE COME UNDER THEIR SWAY."
The philosophy of Geeta does not suggest, even in its
implications, any kind of running away from the worldof-sense-objects. Krishna's creed is to live HERE and
NOW, in the midst of situations in life, in this very world,
and to experience them through our sacred vehicles of the
body, mind, and intellect. The only insistence is that on all
occasions, a wise man should be a master of the vehicles
and not a helpless victim of these matter-envelopments.
And the secret of this mastery in life is to live free from the
tyrannies of attachments and aversions.
In order to detach ourselves from both our likes and
dislikes, we have to get rid of our false ego-centric
vanities. Likes and dislikes belong to the ego. Therefore,
all ego-less acts, as we have explained earlier, accomplish
a purgation of Vasanas. Vasanas create the mind; where the
mind is, there revels the ego. To the extent the Vasanas
have been reduced, to that extent the mind has become
non-existent. Where the mind has ended, there the
240

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

reflection of the Consciousness called the "ego" has also
ended.
THE METHODS BY WHICH WE CAN BRING ABOUT
THE VASANA-PURGATION ARE EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
35. Better is one's own 'duty' , though devoid of merit, than the
'duty' of another well discharged. Better is death in one's own
'duty' ; the 'duty' of another is fraught with fear (is productive
of positive danger) .
The word Dharma in Sanskrit is the most elusive word for
translation into English. It is used generally in more than
one definite meaning. Terms like righteousness, good
conduct, duty, noble quality, etc., are some of them. We
have explained it earlier and found how Dharma
essentially means "the Law of being" of anything in the
world.
That which determines one man's personality as distinctly
different from another's, it is very well known, is the
texture of the thoughts entertained by him. This texture of
his thoughts is, again, in its turn, determined by the
pattern of thinking (vasanas), which his mind has gained
from its own past. These pre-determined 'channels-ofthinking' created by one's own earlier ways of thinking are
called the Vasanas. Thus Dharma should be conceived here
as the Vasanas in our mind, for no other explanation will
241

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

be correct since the very discussion now is upon mental
control. The word "duty," used by us in our translation, is,
in this special sense, to be understood as Vasanas."
Swadharma AND Para dharma --- Swadharma is not the duty
which accrues to an individual because of his "caste,"
which is ever a sheer accident of birth. In its right import
Swadharma means the type of Vasanas that one discovers in
one's own mind. To act according to one's own taste,
inborn and natural, is the only known method of living in
peaceand joy, in success and satisfaction. To act against
thegrain of one's own Vasanas would be acting in terms of
Para dharma --- and that this is fraught with danger is very
well known.
In the context of the Geeta, there is a direct message for
Arjuna. Arjuna is born a prince, trained in the art of war
and has exhibited in his life his insatiable thirst for
heroism and adventure. Naturally, his Swadharma is that
of a prince and that can find fulfilment only in dangerous
actions and endless exertions. Perhaps, as it was evident
in the first chapter, Prince Arjuna had gathered during his
early education, that the life of renunciation and
meditation --- the life of a Brahmin --- was nobler than his
own life. And therefore, he wanted to run away from the
battle-field into the silent caves-of-meditation. In this
stanza, Krishna reminds him that to act according to his
own Vasanas, even imperfectly, is the right path for his
development. It is dangerous to suppress his own
242

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

personality-expression and copy the activities of someone
else, even if he be living a nobler and diviner life.
THOUGH THE SOURCE OF EVIL HAS BEEN POINTED
OUT EARLIER (II-62 AND III-34), YET WITH A VIEW TO
ELICITING A CONCISE AND CLEAR STATEMENT OF
WHAT WAS BUT DESULTORILY AND VAGUELY
EXPRESSED ARJUNA ASKS:
Arjuna said: 36. But, by what impelled does man commit sin,
though against his wishes, O Varshneya, constrained, as it
were, by force?
Following the tradition of the scriptures, the disciple now
asks a definite question upon the very theme of the
discussion. The very question shows that Arjuna has, to a
large extent, got out of the hasty conclusions which he
exhibited until the beginning of the second chapter. He
has become introspective, and therefore, conscious of
certain forces working within himself that were ruining
and obstructing the play of his own higher impulses. The
doubt is couched in such familiar words that it appears as
though it is a doubt raised by some student of our own
times.
There is no living man who has not in himself a
sufficiently clear conception of the good and the
meritorious. Every one understands intellectually what is
RIGHT, but it is only when it comes to action that one
243

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

invariably gets tempted to do the WRONG. This
paradoxical confusion, between one's ideology and one's
own actions, becomes quite a big problem to all those who
try to introspect and review themselves.
The Divine in us, with Its nobler aspirations, wants to
fulfil Itself with Its higher impulses and subtler
achievements, but the animal instinct in us tempts us
away, and we walk the path of the baser joys of the flesh.
This invariably happens even against our own wishes.
Arjuna is enquiring of the Lord: "What is the exact nature
of this SATAN-in-our-bosom which thus systematically
loots away the good in us?"
Varshneya is the name of Lord Krishna, meaning: "One
born in the family of the Vrishnis."
THE LORD SAYS: "LISTEN. I SHALL TELL YOU WHO
THAT ENEMY IS OF WHOM YOU ASK --- WHO IS THE
SOURCE OF ALL EVIL":
The Blessed Lord Said: 37. It is desire, it is anger born of the
"active, " all-devouring, all-sinful; know this as the foe here (in
this world) .
IT IS DESIRE, IT IS WRATH --- Desire is the inner SATAN
in the individual's bosom. We have seen earlier that desire
is nothing other than our own spiritual "ignorance,"
expressing itself in our intellectual personality. This
244

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

statement in the stanza is not to be understood as
enumerating two different things. "Desire" itself, under
certain circumstances, gains expression as "anger." A
constant agitation of the mind, expressing as an
uncontrollable impatience to gain something, is called
"desire." Desire is generally for something other than
ourselves. In the clash of existence, beings and
circumstances may come between ourselves and the
"object of our desire," and in such cases, our "desire" --impulses, striking at the obstacle, gain the ugly look of
"wrath."
Thus, whenever emotions for acquisition and possession
of an object flow incessantly towards that object, the
bundle of thoughts so flowing is called "desire;" while the
same emotions, when they get obstructed from reaching
their desired objects, and get refracted at an intermediate
obstacle, are called "anger." This "desire-anger-emotion" is
the very SATAN in us that compels us to compromise
with our own intellectually known Higher values of
existence, and tempts us to perpetrate sins. Greater the
desire, greater the power in the pull towards the sinful
and the low. Once desire has come to manifest itself in our
intellect, it enshrouds the wisdom in us.
Desire and anger, and their numberless children of sin
and sorrow, must ever come to breed upon the marshy
lands of our deluded intellect. To come under their sway
is "ignorance." To come to rule over them is "Wisdom."
245

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE LORD NOW ILLUSTRATES HOW DESIRE IS OUR
FOE AND HOW IT VEILS OUR DISCRIMINATION:
38. As fire is enveloped by smoke, as a mirror by dust, as an
embryo by the womb, so this (wisdom) is enveloped by that
(desire or anger) .
Three different examples have been given to illustrate
how desires and the consequent anger delude our rational
capacity and choke our discrimination. Repetition is an
unpardonable crime against the "scriptural-style," and the
Geeta faithfully follows the immortal style common to all
Bibles of the world. There is no redundancy, or wasteful
repetition in the Divine Song. With this understanding,
when we try to readthe stanza we find that there are
subtle implications in the three different illustrations used
by the Lord. More is meant here than meets the eye.
The discrimination in man is screened off and obstructed
in its exercise due to the attachment in his mind for the
ever-changing worldly-objects. We all know that our
attachments to things can fall under three distinct
categories. Our desires can either be low and vicious --mind for the flesh-fleshy carnal pleasures --- or our
ambitions may be for an active exertion in order to achieve
power and wealth, to gain strength and might, to win
fame and glory. There can also be a burning aspiration to
strive and to achieve a diviner perfection and a Godly
Self-illumination. Thus, our desires can fall under three
246

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

headings according to the quality of the attachment --inert (Tamasic), or active (Rajasic), or noble and divine
(Sattwic). The veilings that are created over our
discrimination by these different types of qualities (gunas)
are indicated here by the three different examples.
AS FIRE BY SMOKE --- A smoky fire-place, shrouded by
dark curling smoke can sometimes, if not totally, at least
partially, veil the brilliance of the light emitted by the
flames. A wick without a chimney is less bright than with
a chimney, proving the example under review. Even
Sattwic desires veil the infinite glory of the Spirit.
AS DUST ON A MIRROR --- This illustrates the veiling
caused by agitations that cover the purer intellect due to
our thick desires for glory and power (Rajasic). Compared
with the former, this is indeed more complete, and the
removal of it is, naturally, more difficult. The smoke rolls
off even at a passing whiff of breeze, while the mirror
cannot be cleaned even by a storm. It can be polished only
by our own efforts at dusting it clean with the help of a
clean, dry duster. Through the smoke, however thick it
might be, the fire can be perceived; through the dust, if it
be thick, no reflection at all can be seen in the mirror --- if
at all seen it will only be dim.
AS THE FOETUS IN THE WOMB --- This is an illustration
to show how completely the Diviner aspect in us is
screened off by the low animal appetites and the vulgar
desires for the sensuous. The foetus is covered by the
247

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

womb until it matures, and there is no method of
observing it as long as it is in the womb. The veiling is
complete, and it can drop off only after a definite period of
time. Similarly, the desires for the flesh-fleshy enjoyments
build, as it were, a womb around the discriminative
power in us, and such low mental pre-occupations
(Tamasic) can drop off only after a longer period of
evolutionary growth undergone by such a deluded mindand-intellect.
In the true scriptural style, Krishna thus distinguishes
between the different textures in the veils that come to
cover the soul when the individual is entertaining
different types of desires. In short, desire is that which
hides the Divine in us.
IN THIS STANZA IT IS NOT CLEARLY STATED,
WHICH
COVERS
WHAT;
THE
LITERAL
TRANSLATION OF THE WORDS AS THEY STAND IN
THIS COUPLET ONLY SAYS, "SO IS THIS COVERED BY
IT." THE TWO PRONOUNS, 'IT' AND 'THIS,' ARE
DEFINED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA AND
THEREIN WE FIND AN EXPLANATION OF BOTH:
39. Enveloped, O Son of Kunti, is 'wisdom' by this constant
enemy of the wise in the form of 'desire, ' which is difficult to be
appeased, like fire.

248

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This stanza vividly explains to us that discrimination
(Jnana) the capacity to distinguish the Real from the
unreal, the permanent from the impermanent, the true
from the false, which gives man his higher status in the
scale of evolution --- is the divine faculty that gets
screened off from us due to our own greedy and insatiable
desires. The pronouns in the previous stanza now stand
clearly elucidated: the "discriminative capacity" in us (it --idam) gets screened off by the insatiable "desires" (by this -- tena).
HE NOW TELLS US WHICH ARE THE SEATS OF
'DESIRE,' WHICH, BY ENVELOPING WISDOM, FORMS
THE ENEMY OF THE WHOLE WORLD. THE SEAT OF
THE ENEMY BEING KNOWN, IT IS EASY TO KILL IT:
40. The senses, the mind, and the intellect are said to be its seat;
through these, it deludes the embodied by veiling his wisdom.
As a true soldier, Arjuna understands that there is an
inner enemy called "desire," which, like an efficient
saboteur, undermines the wealth and security of his inner
kingdom; and as a true prince, the royal demand of
Arjuna is for immediate information as to the exact hideout of this dangerous bandit. Krishna, as the spiritual
teacher, has to indicate to his adventurous student where
exactly the den of this devil is, from where he plans his
nefarious activities. Indicating the secret fortresses of this
249

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

inner enemy "desire," the Lord says, "the senses, the mind,
and the intellect are said to be its
seats of action."
A true criminal, functioning as an efficient leader of a
gang, operating in a large area, will generally have more
places than one to function from. Three main offices, from
where "desire," in different forms, functions to destroy the
peace and health of our inner life, have been indicated
here very clearly.
The sense-organs, functioning without restraint in the
world of sense-objects, are a very convenient theatre for
"desire" to function in. When the external stimuli reach the
mind through the sense-organs, the mind also becomes a
breeding centre of sorrows created by "desire." Lastly, the
intellect, working and playing with the memories of the
sense-enjoyments it had lived, and of the mental
attachments it had entertained, becomes yet another safe
den for "desire" to function from.
The deluded ego, foolishly identifying with the body,
desires sense-enjoyments. Thoughtlessly identifying with
the mind, it thirsts to experience more and more
emotional satisfactions. And lastly, identifying with the
intellect, it plans to re-live the remembered experiences of
sense-enjoyments and mental-joys.

250

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

TO HUNT FOR "DESIRE" IN THESE THREE HIDE-OUTS
IS TO COME, AT LAST, FACE TO FACE WITH IT. HOW
FINALLY TO OVERCOME THIS INNER ENEMY IS
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
41. Therefore, O best of the Bharatas, controlling first the
senses, kill this sinful thing, the destroyer of knowledge and
wisdom.
As indicated earlier, Krishna declares a truth only when
he has exhausted all the logical arguments leading to it.
After giving all the arguments, he summarises here:
"therefore, restrain the senses first," so that you may
finally throw overboard the inner enemy "desire."
"Desire" is called sinful, since, in its grosser
manifestations, it tends to make us live and work
satisfying our lower nature, and thus persuades us to live
a lower devolutionary life. Even at its best (Sattwic), like
"the smoke that covers the fire," "desire" does not allow
the full dawn of the Infinite, which is the Self in us. Thus,
"desire," in all its textures, contributes to the sins of man,
and, therefore, it is styled here as "THE SINFUL THING."
It is easy for a doctor to prescribe a medicine for my
wound and promise me an immediate healing. It is indeed
consoling to have the prescription in my hand. But, I am
sure, I will never gain a cure if the prescription requires
me to prepare an ointment out of "sky-flowers." Similarly,
251

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

it is quite a dignified advice for a spiritual Master to
declare, "control the senses and cast off the 'desires,' O
man!" --- But, unless the teacher gives us a method by
which we can get this prescription dispensed, it will be as
useless as the "sky-flower-treatment" for my painful
wound.
WHERE SHOULD ONE TAKE ONE'S STAND, AND
CAST OFF THE DESIRES?"... THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:
42. They say that the senses are superior (to the body) ; superior
to the senses is the mind; superior to the mind is the intellect;
one who is even superior to the intellect is He, (the Atman ) .
This and the following stanza with which Vyasa
concludes the third chapter of his incomparable Geeta,
give every seeker a perfect technique by which he can
bring about a successful hunting and capture of his inner
enemy, "desire."
Although we cannot expect in the Bhagawad Geeta --especially in one of the very opening chapters --- an
exhaustive treatment of the technique of meditation, yet
we find that, in these stanzas, the Lord has etched out a
complete outline of the "Scheme-for-Self-discovery."
Compared with the objects of the world, we can easily
understand that the sense-organs are more sacred and
divine. Of the instruments that constitute our physical
252

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

structure, certainly the sense-organs are subtler than the
organs-of-action. Everyone of us can easily experience that
our mind controls and orders our sense-organs, and,
therefore, we know that the mind is subtler than the
Indriyas.
No doubt, the mind has a vast kingdom to roam about in,
but, even so, it has its own limitations and fixed frontiers.
From knowledge to knowledge we extend the frontiers of
our mind and all along this aggressive march of new
conquests it is the intellect that first crosses the existing
frontiers of the mind, and wins for it the neighbouring
kingdoms of "fresh knowledge." In this sense, the intellect
has a greater pervasiveness than the mind, and, therefore,
it is conceived of as being subtler than the mind. That
which lies beyond the intellect is called the Supreme, the
Atman.
The Consciousness in man which lights up the very
intellectual ideas in him must necessarily be subtler than
the intellect itself. In the Upanishads it has been finally
declared that there is nothing subtler than the Self, the
Atman. The technique of meditation lies in the conscious
withdrawal of all our identifications with our body, mind
and intellect. All efforts end when we have thus gathered
our entire awareness from its delusory pre-occupations
and made it live in Itself as Itself --- as Objectless
Awareness.

253

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE GOAL GAINED BY PURSUING THIS ART OF
MEDITATION IS EXPLAINED IN THE FOLLOWING:
43. Thus knowing Him, who is superior to intellect, and
restraining the self by the Self, slay you, O mighty-armed, the
enemy in the form of 'desire, ' no doubt hard indeed to conquer.
With this stanza, not only does the chapter conclude, but,
the special advice demanded by Arjuna has also been
finally
given.
Through
'knowledge'
alone
is
'ignorance'ended; through a lived experience of the Self
alone can we end our 'ignorance-of-the-Self.' This spiritual
'ignorance,' we have already found, creates 'desires.' The
Lord has indicated earlier that 'desire' functions and
thrives in the fields of the sense-organs, the mind, and the
intellect. Through the processes of meditation, when we
withdraw from our false identifications with the objects,
the body and the mind, the 'desire'-faculty, that was till
now roaming about and functioning in the outer fields, is
gathered and established in the intellect.
As long as we maintain in ourselves the limiting adjuncts
of the matter-envelopments, so long we cannot realise our
divine potentialities, but instead, in our delusion, we will
understand ourselves to be nothing more than the little
ego --- limited, bound, finite and ever-sobbing. After the
re-discovery of our own diviner existence we will be able
to live "restraining the self by the Self." In a perfect
Buddha's life, his ego functions completely under the
254

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

control of the diviner in him. No more then can the
'desire'-impulses, if at all they arise in the mind, play their
mischiefs and bring about any devastations in his inner
life.
It is very interesting to note that the philosophy of the
Geeta preaches a constructive re-organisation of life and
not the destruction or rejection of life's possibilities.
"Desire," being a painful leprous oozing wound, we are
lovingly advised about the balm to cure the malady, and
to live thereafter, in all efficiency, as a Master of
circumstances and a Lord of our own emotions. A seeker
who has accomplished this in himself is called a God-man,
a Sage, a Prophet!
Thus in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta, in
the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the third discourse
ends entitled: THE KARMA YOGA
This chapter is called Karma Yoga. The term Yoga means
the act of connecting the lower with the higher, through a
technique consisting of one's own self-evolution. Any
method by which the lower in us is educated and trained
to live a Higher way-of-life --- wherein we gain a more
effective control upon both our life without and life within
--- is called Yoga.
Here is a method of self-development pointed out to the
Arjuna-type of men, who, fully armed and standing on the
255

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

battle-field of life, facing an array of opposing forces, more
powerful, better organised, and well-supplied with
equipments, are ready to fight and destroy them. In fact
every honest man in life is to a large extent --- be he a fool,
be he a saint --- an Arjuna facing his problems with
hesitations... wanting to run away, and yet, not daring to
do so! The training of Karma Yoga prepares us for the
greater fights on life's battle-fields.
Om Om Om Om Om

Chapter 4
Jnana Karma Sanyasa Yoga
The Yoga of Renunciation of Action with
Knowledge
The Blessed Lord said: 1. I taught this Imperishable YOGA to
Vivasvan; Vivasvan taught it to Manu; Manu taught it to
Ikshvaku.
256

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

As we said in our introduction to this chapter, the Lord is
making an open statement, that what He had been saying
so far was nothing other than an intelligent reiteration of
what is the content of the immortal Vedas. Inspired by a
Divine remembrance, the Lord declares that He Himself,
at the very beginning of creation, imparted the Knowledge
of the Vedas to the Sun, and later on, the Sun-god
conveyed it to his son, Manu, the ancient law-giver of
India. Manu, in his turn, declared it to Ikshvaku, the
ancestor of the Solar-dynasty that ruled over Ayodhya for
a long period of time.
The word "Veda" is derived from the root Vid, "to know";
Veda, therefore, means 'Knowledge.' The 'Knowledge' of
divinity lurking in man and the technique by which it can
be brought out to full manifestation are the theme of the
Veda text-books, and the Truth of this theme is eternal.
Just as we can say that electricity is eternal, as there was
electricity even before the first scientist discovered it, and
electrical energy will not be exhausted because of our
forgetfulness of its existence, so too the divine nature of
man will never be destroyed because of our non-assertion
of it. The knowledge of the divine content and its
possibilities in man are indeed eternal.
The creation of the universe, it is accepted even by
modern science, must have started with the Sun. As the
source of all energy, the Sun was the first of the created
257

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

objects, and with its very creation, this Great Knowledge
of the Self was given out to the world.
The theme of Vedic literature being the subjective divinity,
language fails to express it completely. No deep
experience can be exhaustively expressed in words.
Therefore a study of the scriptures by one's own self is apt
to create misunderstandings in the mind of the student,
rather than a right appreciation of it. Thus it is a timehonoured tradition in India that spiritual lessons are
directly heard from a true Master, who has vivid inner
experiences in the realm of the Spirit. It has been handed
down from Master to disciple and we have been given
here the identity of the earliest students of Brahma-Vidya.
2. This knowledge, handed down thus in regular succession, the
royal sages knew. This YOGA, by long lapse of time, has been
lost here, O Parantapa (burner of the foes) .
This Yoga, the Yoga in which the Vedic teachings regarding
activity (Pravritti) and retirement (Nivritti) are
comprehended, thus handed down in regular succession
among the "Royal sages," has its own destinies. At certain
periods of history, this Knowledge seems to be readily
available for the service of mankind, but at certain other
periods of history it falls into disuse and becomes, as it
were defunct. The golden era of spirituality dies down to
inaugurate the dark ages of undivine life. At such periods
of monstrous materialism, the generation is not left in
258

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

neglect to suffer and groan under its own negative values.
For, at that time, some great master appears on the
horizon to inspire, to encourage and to lead the generation
away from the ruts of sorrow onto the highroads of
cultural revival.
Krishna rightly evaluates the period of the Mahabharata
and declares: "THIS YOGA, BY LONG LAPSE OF TIME,
HAS BEEN LOST HERE."
SEEING THAT THE "YOGA" HAD BEEN LOST BY
FALLING INTO THE HANDS OF THE WEAK, WHO
COULD NOT CONTROL THEIR SENSES, AND SEEING
THAT THE GENERATION HAD NOT BEEN ABLE TO
ATTAIN THE OBJECT OF LIFE, THE LORD ADDS THE
FOLLOWING:
3. That same ancient "YOGA" has been to-day taught to you by
Me, for you are My devotee and My friend. This is a Supreme
secret.
With a direct statement in the style of an open confession,
Krishna is here removing all possible misgivings of the
orthodox, by insisting that the Truth he has declared in
the last chapter... Karma Yoga... is nothing other than the
same ancient Yoga.
A Master can feel really inspired and instruct efficiently,
only when he establishes a certain type of affectionate
259

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

rapport with the students. Krishna finds that his friend
Arjuna is fully devoted to Him, and that he will certainly
follow the "Path" indicated by Him. The relationship
between teacher and taught should not be a mere
commercial arrangement of "you-pay-and-I-teach." Mind
and intellect blossom forth only in a warmer climate of
love and freedom, friendship and mutual understanding.
These qualities required for a healthy transference of the
subjective knowledge were found in full measure in
Arjuna and therefore, Krishna says 'I taught you' this Yoga
in the earlier chapter.
The secrecy mentioned here only indicates that a man,
however wise he might be, may not come to suspect the
existence of the Atman in himself without being so advised
by a man of Experience. The Self being that which is
beyond the intellect, (III-41) the reasoning capacity in a
man cannot come to suspect the existence of an Eternal,
Changeless, Conscious Principle, subtler than the intellect,
ever illumining the thoughts rising in the very intellect.
Hence, this Science of Truth is called here as the Supreme
secret."
IN ORDER NOT TO LEAVE IN ANYBODY'S MIND AN
IMPRESSION
THAT
ANY
INCONSISTENT
STATEMENT HAS BEEN MADE BY THE LORD,
ARJUNA ASKS, AS THOUGH RAISING AN
OBJECTION:

260

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjuna said: 4. Later was Your birth, and prior was the birth of
Vivaswan (Sun) ; how am I to understand that You taught this
YOGA in the beginning?
There is a palpable anachronism in the opening stanza of
this chapter. Krishna says that he taught this Eternal Truth
to Lord Sun in the beginning of creation. It was quite
natural for Arjuna to think of Krishna as the son of
Devaki, the Flute-bearer of Gokula. To Arjuna, his
charioteer Krishna had a definite date of birth, and was
only his own contemporary. Therefore, Krishna Himself
could not have advised the Sun, who, by all calculations,
is the one who manifested in nature much earlier than all
the planetary worlds.
TO REMOVE FROM THE MINDS OF THE HASTY
READERS THE POSSIBLE MISUNDERSTANDING
THAT KRISHNA, THE SON OF DEVAKI, IS THE
SPEAKER OF THE GEETA, VYASA MAKES THE
BLESSED LORD DECLARE THE FOLLOWING:
The Blessed Lord said: 5. Many births of Mine have passed as
well as yours, O Arjuna; I know them all but you know them
not, O Parantapa (scorcher of foes) .
The scriptural masters of the Hindus exhibit an infinite
amount of patience and understanding, which almost
amounts to an intellectual daring, and they readily come
out to satisfy all possible doubts of all the students. Here
261

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

we find Krishna trying to explain how He was the very
Infinite in His Real Nature and that He had Himself, in the
very beginning of creation, given out Brahma-Vidya to
Lord Sun.
In this section we find an exhaustive discussion of the
"theory of incarnation" (Avatara), as propounded in the
Pauranic literature. To many foreigners, this portion of the
Hindu philosophy and belief has been very confusing, and
many of them have expressed such opinions about it; and,
perhaps, none has put it so vehemently as Max Mueller.
But, when we try to understand it with a sufficient
background of the Vedantic concept of creation, it is not
very difficult for us to follow the idea. We have elsewhere
explained in the "Fall of Man" how, when the Infinite
Reality functions through 'unactivity' (Sattwa), we have
the concept of the God-Principle. Later on in this section,
Krishna Himself explains how He, in all freedom, takes
upon Himself the matter-envelopments and plays the
game of the Immortal among the mortals --- but all the
time Himself being ever conscious of His own complete
Divine Nature.
Not a single mortal embodiment can be the result of sheer
accident. Every man comes to the field of the world only
as a result of his evolutionary progress, even according to
the Darwinian theory. Each embodied life indicates a long
autobiography of that ego, and it is only after a long chain
of existence in different forms that it has at last reached its
262

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

present destination. In each life, as soon as the ego
expresses itself in its given field of activity, it, fortunately,
forgets the entire past, and carries with it only a distinct
flavour (vasana) thereof. But a Master-mind like Lord
Krishna, in His Divine Omniscience, understands that
both He and Arjuna had been through many vicissitudes
of existence, and that "I KNOW THEM ALL WHILE YOU
KNOW THEM NOT."
"HOW THEN CAN YOU, THE ETERNAL LORD, HAVE
A BIRTH IN THE ABSENCE OF DHARMA AND
ADHARMA?" LISTEN:
6. Though I am unborn and am of imperishable nature, and
though I am the Lord of all beings, yet, ruling over My own
Nature, I take birth by My own MAYA.
Here is the most daring and original thought of Vyasa, we
may say, throughout the entire Geeta. The Supreme, on
account of His unquestioned freedom, by His own
perfectly free will, takes upon Himself the conditioning of
matter, and manifests Himself in a particular embodiment
in the world, for serving the deluded generation of that
time. To the Lord, His 'ignorance'is but a pose assumed,
not a fact lived. A mortal becomes victimised by his
Avidya, while the Lord is Master of His Maya. A driver is
bound by his duty to the vehicle, while the owner of the
vehicle is Lord of it. He uses the vehicle for his purposes,
and whenever he reaches his immediate destination, he
263

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

leaves the vehicle with all freedom, and enjoys his own
independent activities. But, the poor driver, bound to the
vehicle, will have to guard it against intruders and serve
the vehicle as its servant. The Lord uses the matterenvelopments and their limitations as a convenience and
as a set of necessary tools in His game of protecting the
creation.
Thus, though the Lord is Unborn and Changeless in His
Nature, and ever a Lord of matter, yet, keeping His Maya
perfectly under His own control, He comes into the world,
through His own free will. All the time He is fully
conscious of His own Divine status and unchallenged
prerogative. He does not come into being as others do,
compelled by His past Karma, to live here in the world
under the thraldom of Nature. He is not bound by His
mental temperaments but He is ever free from the
mischiefs of His own Maya.
You ask your servant to take your heavy motor-cycle to
the nearby garage for refilling it. If you watch him doing it
you will have some idea of what the Lord is trying to
express here. To that poor man, the unwieldy machine is a
calamity, a suffering. To push it across the road is a risky
adventure for him, because the machine, by its own
weight, guides him, he being powerless to assert his
mastery over it. On the other hand, if you yourself were to
ride, or push, the motor-cycle, you can joyously, and
easily, do so. The vehicle remaining the same, in your
hands it becomes a slave to carry you, while the poor
264

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

servant was being dragged by the clumsy weight of the
heavy machine!
To an ordinary man who is ignorant of the working of his
vehicle, it becomes a painful agony and a difficult
responsibility to make use of these instruments. To the
Lord, the world is no problem, and His personal
equipments and their appetites are always perfectly under
His own control. He comes to lord over every situation.
This perfect freedom of a God-man could not have been
more beautifully brought out in so few words as in these
incomparable lines.
"WHEN AND FOR WHAT PURPOSE IS THE INFINITE
SO BOUND?".. THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:
7. Whenever there is a decay of righteousness, O Bharata, and a
rise of unrighteousness, then I manifest Myself.
"Whenever there is a decline of Dharma, I create for Myself
a body." The term Dharma has already been exhaustively
explained. Dharma, "The Law of Being" is a sacred truth,
and when the majority of the members of a community do
not obey this great Truth, there is a conquest of the world
by a herd of biped-animals, and not a co-operative
happily-living family of men, pursuing life in their full
dignity as intelligent social beings. In all such dark
periods of history, some great Master comes to present
265

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

himself as the leader of men to revive 'the-standard-of-life'
and its moral values. This is generally done, not only by
giving a fillip to the existing nobler values, but also by a
corresponding policy of total elimination of the wicked.
It is for this purpose that the Infinite, from time to time,
wears the "matter-apparel" and appears on the scene of
activity, like the owner of an estate, who now and then
puts on his gumboots to inspect and reorganise his estate.
Even while he is on the work-spot, in the burning sun,
among his workers, he is conscious of his lordship over,
and ownership of, the entire estate. Similarly, the
Supreme, which is the substratum for the pluralistic
world, puts on the body-gown and, as it were, walks into
the dusky atmosphere of the immoral life of mankind, for
the purpose of re-organising and conducting a thorough
spring-cleaning of the bosom of man.
In the descent of God explained here, it is very clearly said
that the Lord takes upon Himself, a body, projected for
the purpose by Himself, and that He reserves for Himself
the Divine freedom to be IN it, and yet not OF it: "THEN I
BODY MYSELF FORTH."
FOR WHAT PURPOSE ?
8. For the protection of the good, for the destruction of the
wicked and for the establishment of rightenousness, I am born in
every age.
266

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is quite evident that the Infinite cannot project Itself
forth unless there is some "desire." The State of Desirelessness is but the State of Actionless-ness. Without some
equipment or the other, electricity cannot, of its own
accord, manifest itself. Similarly, the Supreme cannot, and
need not project out into a Divine, or an undivine form --as an Immortal Omniscient God or as a mortal foolish ego
--- unless there is some desire, or the other, to precipitate
the manifestation A super-saturated solution, if left alone,
undisturbed, can carry its extra quantity of crystals in
itself; but the moment a minutest particle of the same
substance is thrown into that beaker, immediately, all the
extra crystals get thrown out in crystal-form. Similarly, the
Dynamic Supreme, the Womb of Infinite potentialities,
cannot bring forth any form, or forms, unless there is an
intention --- it may be Divine, it may be good, it may be
bad.
Then the DESIRE that made the Supreme assume the
Divine form of Krishna --- the Enchanting Cowboy, the
Blue Lover-of-All-is here explained in Vyasa's own words.
In the stanza, Vyasa makes Krishna confess His initial
"desire," that caused His manifestation.
The divinest of all "desires" is, indeed, a selfless thirst to
serve the world; but all the same it is a DESIRE. In order
to "PROTECT THE GOOD," when the Absolute starts ITs
Godly career, it is the very necessity of Maya that He, the
very Lord of Delusion, has to take upon Himself one more
added mission," THE DESTRUCTION OF THE WICKED."
267

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here 'DESTRUCTION' is not annihilation of the
individuals as much as the REMOVAL OF THE WRONG
TENDENCIES in the individuals. It is a process of refitting
the wardrobe wherein some old clothes are irredeemably
spoiled, and have to be eliminated in order to make more
space for newly-made and other refitted items. Similarly,
Prophets, when they come, they encourage the good,
sometimes they rejuvenate the bad, and often eliminate
the poisonous specimens from the garden-of-life.
This much Lord Krishna was compelled to explain about
Himself because it was perfectly evident that Arjuna was
blissfully unaware of the true Divine nature of Krishna.
The line of arguments adopted by Arjuna in the opening
chapter to justify his conduct in his friend's eyes would be
meaningless if Arjuna did not, in fact, believe that he was
addressing a human being. It would, in such a case,
suggest that Arjuna was an utter atheist who would not
rely for his victory upon his Divine companion. All the
same, when Krishna comments upon Arjuna,
characterising him as a non-caviller, a friend and a
devotee, deserving His assistance, Arjuna appeals to
Krishna, with a childlike simplicity: "DO TEACH ME, I
AM THY DISCIPLE." This was undeniably an attitude of
profound respect but no indication that Arjuna treated
Krishna as God-Almighty, Himself.
WHY IS THE LORD GIVING THIS BIT OF HIS
AUTOBIOGRAPHY?
268

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

9. He who thus knows, in true light, My divine birth and action,
having abandoned the body, he is not born again; he comes to
Me, O Arjuna.
After explaining the how and the why of incarnations in
general, Krishna declares that those who, by constant
contemplation upon this fact, understand the Divine birth
and activities of the Lord, end their limitations and reach
Godhood. That it is not a mere understanding or knowing
that is indicated here is clear from the very words, "IN
TRUE LIGHT" (Tattwatah), that is, we have to experience
subjectively how and when the Supreme Atman takes Its
Avatara in us. Today, no doubt, individually, we live as
limited mortal brutes, but, at certain moments, when we
are entertaining pure selfless "desires," the very same
Spark-of-Life in us comes to manifest a divine potency
and a celestial dash.
The stanza also subtly indicates that for one's spiritual
development, the practice of Upasana of the blissful form
of the Lord is as efficient a method as meditation upon the
formless-Self. There are some professional Vedantins who
cannot accept the concept of the Lord having an
embodiment. They are merely barking at a shadow. To
one who is practising sincerely and whole-heatedly, the
goal is equally available whether it is through the Upasana
of the Truth with a form (Saguna), or without any form
(Nirguna).
269

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Krishna is indicating here the Supreme State-of-Perfection,
the State-of-Existence from where "ONE IS NOT BORN
AGAIN." In the earlier Vedic literature the State-ofGodhood is described as the "State-of-Deathless-ness"
(Amaratva), while in the later Vedic literature we find a
slow change-over, and the Eternal is explained as the State
from which "ONE IS NOT BORN AGAIN" (Ajah). The
evolution of this concept clearly indicates the intellectual
development in this country at that time. When a society
is immature, its members are afraid of death; but as they
grow and evolve, it is not death that frightens them so
much as the possibility of a new birth, for, it starts a new
lease of agonising existence in imperfect environments.
It is evident that the 'State-of-Deathless-ness' is itself the
'State-of-Birthless-ness,' because death can come only to
that which is born. And yet, the change in expression
declares the maturity that was gained by the Vedicstudents of that period.
THIS PATH OF SALVATION IS NOT ONE MERELY
REASONED OUT BY KRISHNA TO SUIT HIS PRESENT
PURPOSE, BUT IT WAS WALKED EVEN IN ANCIENT
TIMES:
10. Freed from attachment, fear and anger, absorbed in Me,
taking refuge in Me, purified by the Fire-of-Knowledge, many
have attained My Being.
270

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The entire "Path-of-Self-development" and the final Goal
that is to be reached have been indicated in this stanza.
Without renouncing attachment and its by-products,
which always disturb one's mental equipoise, no progress
is ever possible for a seeker. Once this mental discipline is
gained, absorbed in the idea of Self-perfection, the seeker
comes to take total refuge in this great victory. Thereafter,
the mission of Self-perfection becomes a passion with him
to thrill his life. When an individual has thus gained this
stage of Self-development, he becomes fit for the study
and practice of
the great scriptures --- the Upanishads.
(a) The study of the scriptures at the feet of a Master,
followed by (b) independent analysis of Vedantic Truths
by oneself in an attempt to understand their real import,
and lastly, (c) the seeker's slow and steady attempt at
balancing himself in single-pointed meditation --- all these
three together constitute the technique of Selfdevelopment as visualised in Hinduism. A study of the
theory of Vedanta and all our attempts to live the life of
tranquillity and love indicated therein, together constitute
Jnana Tapas.
There are some commentators who read into the stanza a
synthesis of all the three "Paths." The "Path-of-Action" is
indicated in the first-half of the first line, because, unless
one trains oneself in the field of activity, "DETACHMENT
FROM DESIRES, FEAR, AND ANGER" cannot be gained.
271

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The second-half, "ABSORBED IN ME AND TAKING
REFUGE IN ME" indicates the "Path-of-Love," wherein the
devotee, binding himself with love to the 'Lord of his
heart'lives his life, taking refuge in nothing other than the
Lord. The "Path-of-Knowledge" is indicated by the
discriminative analysis and the constant and continued
attempts at identification with the Self (Jnana Tapas). The
import is, that seekers walking all the seemingly different
"Paths" reach but the same Goal, the Supreme, "Me."
In fact, these three "Paths," are but three different
techniques to perfect our mind; all spiritual paths are but
attempts to purify the mind, meaning, to make it steady
and single-pointed. Some of us identify ourselves more
with our bodies than with anything else. Others are, by
temperament, living more in their mental zones. And
there are some again who live more in their rational
personalities. To all these three types of seekers, if one and
the same "path" is indicated, the chances are that the
technique prescribed will not be universal in its
acceptance and application.
But whatever be the "Path" pursued, and whatever be the
type to which the seekers belong, the ultimate experience
of Spiritual Perfection gained by every one of them at the
moment of illumination, is one and the same. This is an
incontrovertible fact, for the mystical literature of the
world reads as though every saint has borrowed and
copied from all the earlier Masters across the world!
272

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THEN LORD KRISHNA MUST BE CHERISHING
FEELINGS OF AFFECTION AND AVERSION, SINCE HE
LIBERATES SOME, AND NOT ALL. THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:
11. It whatever way men approach Me, even so do I reward
them; My path do men tread in all ways, O son of Pritha.
Attachment and aversion are not the weaknesses of the
Lord. He is a mass of Dynamism, the source of all
activities and achievements. We are given the equipment
through which we can, as we like, invoke this Infinite
Mind. If we rightly invoke and carefully use the
equipments, as a reward for our intelligent selfapplication, we can reach the Goal of our activities. If we
misuse them, the very same Divine Force can be the cause
of our utter disaster.
The fuel strength in the petrol can be converted into horsepower through the mechanism under the bonnet. We can
invoke the horse-power to reach our destination, or we
can easily dump ourselves into a mass of twisted
wreckage on the way-side and become a bundle of broken
bones. These accidents are caused by the carelessness of
the driver, although the strength and power with which
the car dashes down the embankment of the road is, no
doubt, supplied by the same petrol. But the strength in the
petrol had no attachment for those whom it guided home
safe. Nor can we say that it had a hatred
273

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

for those whom it wrecked. With neither attachment nor
hatred, the petrol gives its power when invoked through
the mechanism of the engine, and how to make use of the
power depends upon us and our wisdom in employing it.
Similarly, here the Lord says, "I, AS LIFE, LEND MY
POWER TO ALL WITHOUT ANY PARTIALITY; IN
WHATEVER FORM THEY INVOKE ME, IN THAT
FORM I SERVE THEM." An electric plug in the house can
be made use of to hear a song over the radio, to cool
ourselves with the breeze of a fan, to boil water, to cook or
to warm the room with a heater; it all depends upon what
instrument we plug into it. It is never possible that
electricity flowing through the fan, of its own accord, can
start emitting fire or light. Similarly, the unmanifest
Eternal Force of Life can be invoked, and It shall fulfil all
"desires" through us according to the type of our
invocations.
IF GOD BE THUS FREE FROM ALL ATTACHMENTS
AND OTHER EVIL PASSIONS, HE, THE LORD, MUST
BE GRACIOUS TO ALL CREATURES ALIKE AND
MUST BE ABLE TO GRANT THEM ALL THEIR
DESIRES. THEN WHY IS IT THAT ORDINARILY MEN
DO NOT DESIRE TO SEEK THE LORD AND GAIN THE
INFINITE? --- LISTEN WHY IT IS SO;

274

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

12. They who long for satisfaction from actions in this world,
make sacrifices to the gods; because satisfaction is quickly
obtained from actions in the world-of-objects.
If the Atmic-force guides us on both, the path-of-good and
on the path-of-evil, then how is it that in this world of ours
we see but a rare few who are honestly trying to travel the
path-of-rightenousness, while the majority are pursuing
the road-of-evil? This question must necessarily come to
the mind of all intelligent students, and Lord Krishna is
answering this possible query. He says, whether the mind
wants to pursue an extrovert life, or live the introvert joys,
it can do so only by borrowing its capacity and capability
from the Omnipotency of the Atman; but the mind ever
chooses an extrovert career, in stinking sensuality, because
it is easy to gain cheap pleasures by satisfying the
sensuous ticklings of nerve-tips.
This is the cause for sensuality in the world, and Krishna
explains why a majority of us, inspite of our best efforts,
live a life of animal passions: "BECAUSE SUCCESS
RESULTING FROM ACTION IS QUICKLY ATTAINED
IN THE HUMAN WORLD."
On this globe of ours, the quickest results are gained when
our sense-organs come in contact with their desired
objects as the result of deliberate actions. Since a sensuous
life is a life of least resistance, though of cheap
275

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

pleasures, the ordinary man, in his keen appetite for joy
and peace, wastes his spiritual strength in hunting after,
procuring, and enjoying the fleeting sense-objects. The
truth of the statement is well within the experience of
every one of us.
The passage should not be understood only to say that
worldly success is easily gained, but that, as men, we can
intelligently plan our actions in such a way that we can,
out of our actions, create or compel nature to yield a
greater dose of happiness than the members of the
vegetable and animal kingdoms.
MEN WHO ARE SEEKING THE LOWER OR THE
HIGHER
WAYS
OF
LIFE
THROUGH
THE
EMPLOYMENT OF THEIR SPIRITUAL STRENGTH CAN
BE DIVIDED, UPON THE BROAD BASIS OF THEIR
INTROVERT AND EXTROVERT NATURES; AND THE
EXTROVERT MEN CAN AGAIN BE DIVIDED INTO
FOUR TYPES, ON THE BASIS OF THEIR FINER
DISTINCTIONS OF THE TEXTURES OF THEIR
THOUGHT AND ACTION.
13. The fourfold-caste has been created by Me according to the
differentiation of GUNA an d KARMA; though I am the
author thereof know Me as non-doer and immutable.
This is a stanza that has been much misused in recent
times by the upholders of the social crime styled as the
276

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

caste system in India. Varna, meaning different shades of
texture, or colour, is employed here in the Yogic-sense. In
the Yoga Shastra, they attribute some definite colours to
the triple gunas, which mean, as we have said earlier, "the
mental temperaments." Thus, Sattwa is considered as
white, Rajas as red, and Tamas as black. Man is essentially
the thoughts that he entertains. From individual to
individual, even when the thoughts are superficially the
same, there are clear distinctions recognizable from their
temperaments.
On the basis of these temperamental distinctions, the
entire mankind has been, for the purpose of spiritual
study, classified into four "castes" of Varnas. Just as, in a
metropolis, on the basis of trade or professions, we divide
the people as doctors, advocates, professors, traders,
politicians, tongawalas, etc., so too, on the basis of the
different textures of thoughts entertained by the
intelligent creatures, the four "castes" had been labelled in
the past. From the standpoint of the State, a doctor and a
tongawala are as much important as an advocate and a
mechanic. So too, for the perfectly healthy life of a society,
all "castes" should not be competitive but co-operative
units, each being complementary to the others, never
competing among themselves.
However, later on, in the power politics of the early
middle-ages in India, this communal feeling cropped up
in its present ugliness, and in the general ignorance
among the ordinary people at that time, the cheap pandits
277

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

could parade their assumed knowledge by quoting, IN
BITS, stanzas like this one.
The decadent Hindu-Brahmin found it very convenient to
quote the first quarter of the stanza, and repeat "I
CREATED THE FOUR varnas," and give this tragic social
vivisection a divine look having a godly sanction. They,
who did this, were in fact, the greatest blasphemers that
Hinduism ever had to reckon with. For Vyasa, in the very
same line of the couplet, as though in the very same
breath, describes the basis on which this classification was
made, when he says, "BY THE DIFFERENTIATION OF
THE MENTAL QUALITY AND PHYSICAL ACTION (OF
THE PEOPLE)."
This complete definition of the Varna not only removes
our present misunderstanding but also provides us with
some data to understand its true significance. Not by birth
is man a Brahmana (Brahmin); by cultivating good
intentions and noble thoughts alone can we ever aspire to
Brahmana-hood; nor can we pose as Brahmana merely
because of our
external physical marks, or bodily actions in the outer
world. The definition insists that he alone is a Brahmana,
whose thoughts are as much Sattwic, as his actions are. A
Kshatriya is one who is Rajasic in his thoughts and actions.
A Shudra is not only one whose thoughts are Tamasic, but
also he who lives a life of low endeavours, for satisfying
his base animal passions and flesh-appetites. The scientific
278

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

attitude in which this definition has been declared, is clear
from the exhaustive implications of the statement:
"ACCORDING TO THE DIFFERENTIATION OF "guna"
AND "karma."
We had tried to explain how the Self, functioning through
Its own self-forgetfulness (Maya) as it were, came to
project forth temperamentally in three distinct conditions
of mental and intellectual life: Unactivity, Activity and
Inactivity. Through these triple channels flow the
expressions of Life manifesting the different ideas,
agitations and actions of the embodied-Life. None of the
vagaries of existence would have been possible if the
equipments were not tickled by the touch-of-Life.
Krishna, as the very Source of Life, emphatically asserts
here, that He is the author of it all, in the sense that the
ocean could say that it is the author of all the waves,
ripples, foam, bubbles, etc., and gold can assert that it is
the very creator and sustainer of all gold-ornaments in the
world, inasmuch as no gold-ornament can exist when the
gold element is removed from it.
But, at the same time the Infinite, being All-Pervading, as
we have already explained, cannot participate in any
action and therefore, the Lord, in one and the same breath,
declares that though "HE IS THE AUTHOR OF IT," in His
own Real Nature," HE IS AT THE SAME TIME A NONDOER."
279

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Such contradictions in Vedanta become confusing to the
students, as long as they are not initiated into the
SECRETS OF ITS STUDY. In our conversation, we
generally hear people say "that they reached their
destination ten miles away by sitting in a bus;" "I caught a
train and reached here." Since we understand it in our
usual routine conversation, we do not try to dissect such
statements to discover the contradictions they contain.
Sitting you cannot travel. By catching a train, none can
cover distances. And yet it is so true. When we travel in a
bus or a train, we donot move; we only sit and hang on to
our seats! But stillwe cover the distance because the
vehicle in which we sit, moves on. In other words, the
motion of the vehicle is attributed to us. Similarly, the
creation of the temperaments, which should be attributed
to the mind and intellect, is attributed to the Lord. In fact,
the Lord, in His Essential Nature, being Changeless and
All-Pervading, is neither the Doer nor the Creator.
SINCE I AM NOT IN REALITY THE AUTHOR OF
THOSE ACTIONS OF WHICH YOU THINK ME TO BE
AN AUTHOR:
14. Actions do not taint Me, nor have I any desire for the fruitsof-actions. He who knows Me thus is not bound by his actions.
The Ever-pure and the All-full cannot be tainted, nor can
It have any sense-of-imperfection which can germinate
any "desire." The Lord, the Self, declares here: "ACTIONS
280

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DO NOT TAINT ME NOR HAVE I ANY ANXIETY FOR
THE FRUITS OF ACTIONS." Taint or "desire" can come
only to an ego, which is "the Self, functioning through a
given mind and intellect." When the subtle-body is tainted
by "desires" and agitations then the ego in it seems to be
played upon by these two. This is better understood by
the following analogy.
The sun, reflected in a bowl of water, is entirely
dependent upon the condition of the water. The reflectedsun is shaken when the water in the bowl is disturbed and
it appears to be dim when the water is muddy. Neither the
dimness nor the agitations of the reflection have caused
any change at all in the original object --- the sun in the
Infinite Heavens. Similarly, the ego suffers the evil
tendencies and such other taints of the mind and also gets
disturbed, due to the "desires" for the FRUITS OF ITS
ACTIONS. The Self, in Its Pure Conscious-nature, is not at
all affected by these delusory disturbances of Its own
reflection in the mental pool.
THIS SEEMS TO BE A NOVEL INTERPRETATION OF
THE USUAL VEDIC TECHNIQUE OF SELFPERFECTION. IS THERE ANY PRECEDENT?... LISTEN:
15. Having known this, the ancient seekers-after-freedom also
performed action; therefore, you too perform action, as did the
ancients in the olden times.
281

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

After knowing Me that "I AM NON-AGENT AND I
HAVE NO LONGING FOR THE FRUITS OF ACTIONS,"
and realising the All-full Self-hood, there shall no more be
any "desire" or "egoistic vanities." The technique of Karma
Yoga, as enunciated and propounded in the last chapter,
was practised, says Krishna, even in olden times by many
an intelligent seeker. In short, there is nothing new in the
"Path-of-Action" and all seekers trying to realise the Self
had been following the same technique.
"IF 'KARMA YOGA' IS TO BE PERFORMED, I CAN DO IT
BECAUSE OF YOUR ADVICE. BUT WHY SHOULD YOU
ADD THAT THE ANCIENTS DID THE SAME?" IN
REPLY TO THIS THE LORD SAYS: "LISTEN, THERE IS
GREAT DIFFICULTY IN UNDERSTANDING WHAT
CONSTITUTES RIGHT ACTION"... HOW?
16. What is action? What is inaction? As to this even the
"wise" are deluded. Therefore, I shall teach you "action" (the
nature of action and inaction) , knowing which, you shall be
liberated from the evil (of SAMSARA --- the wheel of birth and
death) .
All of us understand that 'ACTION' means movement of
the limbs with relation to things in the outer world, and
'INACTION' means a state of existence wherein there is a
total cessation of such vigorous and conscious
movements. This is the popular definition of 'action' and
'inaction' which, no doubt, is quite acceptable as far as the
282

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

every-day activities of life are concerned. But from the
philosophical stand-point, the concept and features of
both 'action' and 'inaction' change.
For purposes of self-development, when we consider
'action,' it is not to be valued merely by observing its
manifested qualities but we must also take into
consideration the un-manifested but subtly-working
motives behind the very same action. An action, in itself,
cannot be considered either as good or bad. It is the
MOTIVE BEHIND IT which determines the quality of the
action. Just as the beauty of a fruit is not the last word for
its edibility, but it depends upon its contents, so too, a
beautiful action in itself could be a poisonous act of
criminality, if the motive behind it is low and vicious.
Therefore, it is said that, in discriminating between what
is 'action' and what is 'inaction,' "EVEN THE POET-SEERS
OF OLD ARE CONFUSED." The word 'Kavi,' now-a-days
mainly used for the poets, was the name for the Rishis, the
Seers of Upanishadic declarations. Any inspired man,
recognising and expressing a truth that was noble and
immortal, was called a Kavi.
After stating this difficult problem of discriminating
between 'action' and 'inaction,' Krishna promises here that
He will teach Arjuna what exactly constitutes right action,
by knowing which, naturally, one can save one's self from
all evil.
283

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IT IS FAMILIAR TO ALL, THAT ACTION MEANS
MOVEMENT, AND INACTION MEANS ABSENCE OF
IT: TO SIT QUIET. WHAT IS THERE TO LEARN ABOUT
THEM?
17. For verily (the true nature) of "right action" should be
known; also (that) of "forbidden (or unlawful) action" and of
"inaction" ; imponderable is the nature (path) of action.
Life means activity. Where activity has ended, death has
entered. In active life alone can we progress or deteriorate.
A stagnant pool of water decays and soon gets putrefied;
while the flowing water of a river ever keeps itself fresh,
pure and clean.
Life being dynamic, it cannot, even for a moment, cease to
function. Complete cessation from activities is impossible
so long as life exists.
Activity, therefore, is the very corner-stone of life. Since
man must always actively exist all his lifetime, the entire
possibilities of activities have been taken into
consideration by the great Seers of old in evaluating life.
The accompanying chart will vividly explain their
classifications.
Life is constituted of moments of activity and moments of
inactivity. Through inactivity, neither progress nor
deterioration is ever possible. Deep-sleep or periods of
284

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

complete cessation in existence are intervals of total
holidaying from life, and they can neither make nor
marthe individual's progress in his evolution.
Periods of activity create man. This creative-period
depends upon what type of activity we venture upon.
According to the ancient Seers, activities can be of two
types, constructive or destructive. Constructive activities
which contribute towards the evolution of the individual
are termed here as Karma.
Destructive activities are those that are totally condemned
by the Shastras, because they tend to devolve the
individual, and those are termed in our text books as Vikarma. The constructive activities (Karma) can be of three
kinds: Nitya --- constant duties, Naimittika --- special
duties on special occasions, and Kamya --- work
purposeful and self-determined for winning a desirable
result or reward.
Built upon the ancient Vedic doctrine, Krishna here
expounds an elaborate theory of self-development. He
says that life is but a name for continuous activities. These
activities can fall within two distinct classifications as
Karma and Vi-karma. Lord Krishna's advice to Arjuna is to
avoid the forbidden actions (Vi-karma) and to pursue the
constructive and creative activities of self-development
(Karma). In this scientific analysis, without any formality,
or mental reservation, Krishna totally rejects "inactivity"
(A-karma).
285

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is necessary, it is said here, that a true seeker who is
trying to live a diligent life, contributing to his material
progress and to his spiritual self-development, must
necessarily know this triple classification of life,
considered as a bundle
of activities.
Even after so beautifully defining the three clear and
distinct classifications, Krishna admits that, for an
ordinary man it is not easy to distinguish the one from the
other, and to readily and successfully classify all his
activities under these three headings, because, Krishna
says, "THE NATURE OF KARMA IS IMPONDERABLE. "
In this statement lies the secret suggestion that an action is
to be evaluated not merely on its face value but after a
sincere consideration of the motive working behind it. If
the motive, or desire, or intention of one is pure and
constructive, then the action too is noble and meritorious
for that particular individual. Since in this evaluation of
actions the individual factor is so very predominant, one
must agree with Krishna over the imponderability of the
nature of Karma.
WHAT IS THERE TO LEARN ABOUT ACTION AND
INACTION? THE ANSWER FOLLOWS:

286

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

18. He who recognises inaction in action and action in inaction
is wise among men; he is a YOGI and a true performer of all
actions.
By thus following the rules of right-living (Karma), as
indicated in Vedanta, when an individual has lived a
sufficiently long period of time, the doubt arises as to
when exactly we can say that he has completely reached
the State of Perfection. This question should necessarily
throb in the intellect of all sincere students, and Krishna is
trying to indicate this noble goal of fulfilment of all Karmas
in this stanza.
Action, as we have already seen, is a gross expression in
the outer world of some known, or unknown, deep
"desire" in the intellect. A complete "STATE OF
ACTIONLESS-NESS" would be necessarily the 'STATE OF
DESIRELESS-NESS" or the "STATE OF INFINITE GODHEAD." But the goal indicated here is not this "STATE OF
INFINITE PERFECTION," but only a wayside station on
the pilgrimage. A true and diligent man can discover and
recognise in himself that even in physical inaction there
can be an intense mental and intellectual activity, and he
can also recognise that he, even in the most intense
activities, himself as an observer of it, is revelling in
"unactivity" (A-Karma). This is the maximum Sattwic state.
Such an individual has thereby reached a State of Great
Equanimity, which is almost unavoidable in living a
successful life of meditation. It is not said here, as it is
287

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

usually believed, that right action itself will take us to the
Infinite. This is impossible. As action itself is a child of
"desire," through action alone we can create things; and
created 'results' are, in their very nature, finite. Thus, a
God-head reached through activity can only be a SundayGod-head which must depart from us the following
Monday morning!
Shankara and other great Acharyas have all been tirelessly
repeating that, right action, undertaken with a sense of
devotion and dedication, creates in the bosom of the
student a sense of complete detachment, as though he
himself is a disinterested observer of all that is happening
within and without him. When thus an individual
detaches himself and observes his own activities as part
and parcel of the world of activities around, he gains in
himself an indescribable poise which is essential for the
practice of meditation.
Merely because an individual is keeping quiet, we cannot
ever conclude that he is inactive. Physical inactivity is no
criterion to call one an idler. On the other hand, it is a fact
well-known to all of us, that, when we are intensely
thinking --- whenever we are in a state of creative thinking
--- we are invariably quiet and inactive, physically.
Therefore, in the physical inactivity of one, which is
labelled as idleness by the hectic foot-path-walkers in life,
we can detect intense activity in his deep "within." A
Buddha under the fig-tree, an artist at his easel, a musician
at his instrument, a writer at his desk --- all of them
288

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

punctuate their activities with 'still moments of intense
inactivity'-called unactivity-and they bend forward to
pour out their artistic and literary creations. All these
physical moments of cessation are not mere inactivity but
they are the necessary quietude and silence when the
mind and intellect function with the highest velocity.
Thus, he who has a capacity to introspect, can easily detect
perfect action in complete inaction.
As I am writing these words a certain part in me can stand
apart and visualise how my fingers, constituted of mere
minerals, can hold the pen at the right slant and carry it
along the paper so that the words may be spelt properly
thereon. So, in all activities, this capacity to visualise
discriminatingly our own activity --- this capacity to
observe ourselves functioning in a given field with or
without the other members of the community --- is not
very rare and those who can do it can realise how, inspite
of all our activities, the observer in us which OBSERVES
the activities is most INACTIVE.
The train runs, but not the steam. The fan moves, but not
the electricity. The fuel burns, but not the fire. The body,
mind and intellect function and act, but not the Self, the
Life in them!
Such an individual who can thus stand constantly apart
from himself and observe "the activity in inactivity" and
"complete inactivity even in the highest activity... called
289

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

UNACTIVITY"... is termed here, we must carefully note,
not a man of realisation (Jnani), but an intelligent, fullgrown human creature (Buddhiman). "He is the intelligent
one among men," and he is certainly one who is very near
to the Self (Atma Yuktah).
In short, desireless activities, when undertaken and
performed in a spirit of dedication, purify us, and the
intellect thereby gains a new keenness. Out of such a
purified head, a new faculty, as it were, arises. The
capacity to observe oneself as an actor on the stage of life,
is a capacity divine and noble, inasmuch as it immediately
redeems us from our selfish preoccupations with life's
ever-changing incidents and accidents.
REALISATION OF 'INACTION IN ACTION' AND
'ACTION IN INACTION' IS EXTOLLED AS FOLLOWS:
19. Whose undertakings are all devoid of desires and purposes,
and whose actions have been burnt by the Fire-of-Knowledge,
him the "wise" call a Sage.
He is called a Saint, a man-of-Perfection, "whose
undertakings are all devoid of plan and desire-for-result."
Planning is a shackle upon the freedom of one's activities.
In all planning, we are forcing the circumstances into a
desired mould, a wished-for pattern. In thus driving the
situations to mould themselves into a planned pattern, we
are exhausting ourselves and vainly fighting against
290

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

terrible odds. This method of activity drains away all
inspiration and joy from the worker.
We have already discussed how the desire-for-results
during any activity dissipates our energies. The fruits-ofan-action can only mature in a future period of time and
therefore, to court the results is to escape from the present
and live in the unborn periods of time. It is a law that the
effects depend entirely upon the causes, and so to be
sincere and complete in our activities is the greatest
guarantee for all successful achievements.
One who is a perfect Sage, says Krishna, is one who will
undertake to act "WITHOUT PLANNING" and
"WITHOUT ANY DESIRE FOR FRUITS." In this context,
these two qualifications of a perfect act are to be
understood with kindness and sympathy. A literal
meaning of these two terms should not be used here, as in
that case the statement would become absurd.
The instruction to act "WITHOUT PLANNING AND
DESIRE" does not mean that a man-of-Equilibrium, in his
inspired activity, should not make use of his better
intelligence and plan his activities to gain a desired result.
It only means that, WHILE HE IS AT WORK, he should
not allow his abilities and capacities to run to waste, with
his mental preoccupations and sentimental fears
regarding the results-of-his-work. Vedanta does not in any
way ignore man's intellect. The way of life as advised in
the Geeta provides only a more efficient means to act and
291

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

achieve, to live and to enjoy, cultivating and applying our
own potentialities more intelligently.
An individual, who has thus come to live intelligently and
act diligently, becomes fully wedded to the piece of work
in hand and gets so entirely drunk with the joy of his own
inspiration, that the action cannot leave upon him even a
trace of its reaction. Our mind and intellect will venture
forth to worry over the unknown possibilities and
dangers, unless they can find a more secure hold upon
something nobler and diviner. A perfect Sage is one
whose mind is ever hitched on to the cognition of the
Divine, so that, even when he functions in the world
outside, he is revelling in his own Consciousness within.
By thus painting the psychology of a Sage-at-work, Lord
Krishna is indicating with what mental attitude and
intellectual composure, Arjuna, a seeker, should enter his
fields of activity. These instructions, given by Vyasa
through the mouth of Krishna, are meant for all
generations of seekers and, therefore, words addressed to
Arjuna are also words addressed to you and to me.
When my son wants to become a doctor I would certainly
explain to him the story of the struggle of some known
doctors, so that my son may understand how best he
himself can become a true doctor. So too here, by the
description of a perfect Sage-at-work, Arjuna is being
initiated into the "Path of Self-development," which he is
to follow faithfully, if he is to reach the goal of life.
292

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DEVOID OF ALL DESIRE-PROMPTED ACTIONS, AND
ATTACHMENTS
TO
THEIR
RESULTS,
AND
THEREFORE, HAVING NO SELFISH END IN VIEW,
WHEN A SAGE PERFORMS KINDLY ACTS IN THE
COMMUNITY, HE REALLY DOES NO ACTION; HIS
ACTION IS EQUIVALENT TO "INACTION," SINCE
ALL HIS ACTIONS ARE CONSUMED IN THE FIRE OF
KNOWLEDGE. TO TEACH THIS "UNACTIVITY," THE
LORD SAYS:
20. Having abandoned attachment to the fruits-of-action, evercontent, depending on nothing, he does not do anything, though
engaged in actions.
We are not asked here to renounce the fruits-of-actions as
such nor to ignore them, but we are only warned to
renounce our MENTAL SLAVERY and INTELLECTUAL
CLINGING to the "expected-fruits." Only when we get
preoccupied with
the expected fruits of our actions do we come to exhaust
ourselves, and thus become inefficient in our activities.
Forsaking (tyaktwa) our clinging (Sanga) to the fruits-ofaction (Karma-phala), we are advised to strive for and to
achieve the welfare of the society.
A true painter never willingly sells his masterpiece! To
him, that piece of canvas upon which he has lavished long
293

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

periods of effort, is now by itself a complete reward, even
if he be starving!! As compared to the satisfaction and joy
that it gives to the painter, he feels that even all the wealth
in the world would but be too little a payment for it. If a
mere finite piece of art could thus give to an ignorant man
of agitations and desires, such an invaluable joy, how
much more intense must be the diviner joys of a perfect
saint working in the world of names and forms? Indeed,
the Self-realised Ones, after their experience of the Infinite
Reality as their own Self, become perfectly independent of
everything else.
Again, the anxiety for the fruits-of-action, the sense of
discontentment and the feeling of dependency upon the
things and beings of the world --- all belong to the
misconceived notion of the ego-centre. The ego in us is the
sufferer of all the above-mentioned incapacities and
inabilities. When the seeker-after-Truth rediscovers his
ego to be the Infinite Truth, the limited ego ends its career
of sorrow, and naturally, the agony and the incapacities of
the imperfect ego also end. The reflection of the sun in a
cup of water can be broken up when the water in the cup
is shaken. But when the water is poured out, the reflection
also ends, and no more can the sun in the sky be shaken
by any known method.
Such an individual, who has rediscovered the Self,
"THOUGH SEEMINGLY ENGAGED IN ACTIVITY," does
not do anything.
294

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The body, mind, and intellect act in the world-of-objects,
but not the All-pervading Self --- the Life --- in us. Without
'Life' the body cannot function; but when the body
functions, 'Life' as such cannot be said to function.
Therefore, one who is established in the Self, though he
engaged himself in action, cannot be said to do any action.
The train may move but it would be incorrect to say that
the steam is moving.
It is generally a doubt in the students that, even if all the
reactions of the past actions have ended at the time of Selfre-discovery, when such a prophetic Master undertakes
activity in the world, he would, perhaps, be initiating new
actions of sins and merits for the enjoyment of which he
may again have to take up births. This false idea has been
completely eradicated in this stanza. After the Godexperience, when the saint functions in the world outside,
"THOUGH ENGAGED IN ACTION HE DOES NOT DO
ANYTHING."
EVERY ACTION HAS A REACTION. NATURALLY,
EVEN THE BODILY ACTIONS OF A SAINT SHOULD
HAVE SOME REACTION. THIS IS THE ORDINARY
ARGUMENT. TO NEGATE THIS ASSUMPTION THE
LORD SAYS:
21. Without hope, with the mind and Self controlled, having
abandoned all possessions, doing mere bodily action, he incurs
no sin.
295

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Mere bodily activity is not action that will merit a reaction.
It has already been seen that the reactions of actions take
place in the mental and in the intellectual zones. An action
can leave a mark on our subtle-body only when we act
with an ego-centric consciousness that we are the actors,
and these marks can be effective only when our actions
are motivated by powerful and strong ego-centric
"desires."
Ego is created only when the Self, in its assumed delusion,
identifies itself with the body, mind, and intellect and
their respective fields of objects. This ego draws its
sustenance from the "hopes of the future," and also from
the "satisfaction of the present" possessions.
Therefore, the stanza declares that an individual, (a) when
he has completely renounced hope, (b) when he has
brought his body and mind under perfect control, and (c)
when he has relinquished all possessions, can no longer
sustain the illusory concept of the ego in him. When the
ego has ended, the actions performed by that individual's
body become incapable of leaving any permanent mark
upon his mental constitution, or on his intellectual
character.
In sleep if I become naked I am not charged of any
indecent behaviour; if, in my sleep, my body kicks my
own son, I am not accused of cruelty to my child. For, in
both the above cases we know that "for the actions of my
body I am not responsible, since I was absent in that body
296

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

during those activities." This clearly shows that the egocentric identity with the body is the actor and the sufferer,
and where the ego is not, there the mere bodily actions
cannot bring about any consequences.
A Self-realised Saint's activities do not touch him at all
since he is not the actor; the actions only flow through
him. Such a truly Great One becomes not a doer of actions,
but serves as a glorious instrument for the Lord's Will to
express itself.
If the music coming from a violin is not good, the
audience does not attack the violin, although the violinist
cannot be very safe! The violin, of its own accord, does not
make music but it allows music to emanate from it at the
touch of the flying bow and the tickling fingers of the
performer. Its duties end when its supple chords have
bent under the touch of the musician's dancing fingers. An
ego-less man-of-Perfection is the "wonder instrument"
through which the Divine orchestra plays, singing the
song of the Lord's own Will, faithfully. Any activity
undertaken by a Perfect Master does not and cannot bring
about any consequences, good orevil, upon him; he is only
a "Divine-instrument."
THOUGH A SELF-REALISED MAN RENOUNCES ALL
ACTIONS, HE HAS, OF NECESSITY, TO BARELY
MAINTAIN HIS BODY; SUCH A MAN STEADY ON

297

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE 'PATH-OF-KNOWLEDGE' IS EVER LIBERATED.
TO TEACH THIS THE LORD SAYS:
22. Content with what comes to him without effort, free from the
pairs-of-opposites and envy, even-minded in success and failure,
though acting he is not bound.
Such an individual, who has gone beyond his own ego,
can thereafter commence no desire-prompted activity
with any definite fruit-motive. Naturally he will feel quite
contented and happy in whatever gain spontaneously
rises out of his actions. The state-of-egolessness indicates a
condition of perfect conquest over the mind and intellect.
Naturally therefore, the pairs-of-opposites --- heat and
cold, success and failure, good and bad, joy and sorrow,
etc. --- cannot affect him, they being always the
interpretations of the world-of-objects by the mind.
Where the mind has ended, the intellect too can no more
bring its own affections and prejudices, or its spirit of
competitions and jealousies. We generally get agitated due
to the pulls of success and failure. On the rising tide of
success our ego dances in a vain joy, while in the hollows
of failures it feels miserable and crushed. But when the
ego is completely divinised, the individual will, thereafter,
automatically remain equanimous in both success and
failure. Such an individual who has thus conquered his
ego-centric misconceptions about himself, "THOUGH
298

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ACTING, IS NOT FETTERED" by the natural
consequences of the actions performed (Karma-phala).
When such a Perfect-Master-of-Realisation lives amidst us
he is generally seen to act in no way different from an
ordinary sensible man, and yet, all the same, his activities
show an extra dynamic capacity to carve out a more
complete and enduring success. According to the Lord's
words, the activities of a man-of-Knowledge do not, in
any sense of the term, affect him. Naturally, it becomes a
little difficult for an ordinary man to know readily how
this is accomplished by the sage.
TO EXPLAIN THE DIVINE MOTIVE AND ATTITUDE
WITH WHICH MEN-OF-PERFECTION ACT IN THE
WORLD, THE FOLLOWING NINE STANZAS ARE
DECLARED BY THE LORD:
23. Of one who is devoid of attachment, who is liberated, whose
mind is established in knowledge, who acts for the sake of
sacrifice, all his actions are dissolved.
A Man-of-Wisdom has been fully comprehended in the
first line of this stanza. The qualifications are beautifully
enumerated serially and they themselves explain the
"Path-to-Perfection." Economy of words is the very
essence of the style in all Scriptural books. Even so, they
are particularly careful to use the most suggestive terms
for their purpose and take an artistic joy in ordering the
299

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

very sequence of the words used; here is a brilliant
example of it.
DEVOID OF ATTACHMENT (Gatasangah) --- The divinity
attained by the Rishis is not a new status strangely
acquired by them from some unknown and secret
quarters. It is only a rediscovery of the Perfection that is
already in each one. We are self-exiled from ourselves due
to our attachments with the finite world-of-objects. Thus a
"wise" man is he, from whom all his attachments with the
finite things of the world have dropped away.
LIBERATED (Muktah) --- The majority of seekers have
only a vague idea of what this "liberation" means. The
bondages are created upon our personality and life by
none other than ourselves. These bondages, infinite in
their number, are produced by the subtle chords of our
own attachments with things. The deluded ego feels
fulfilled only through the world-of-objects. Thus, as a
body, it gets attached to the world of its sense-objects; as a
mind it lives enslaved to the world of emotions; and as an
intellect, it gets bound with its own ideas.
WITH MIND CENTRED IN KNOWLEDGE (Jnanaavasthita-chetasah) --- The above phenomenon of perfect
detachment, which produces a sense of complete
liberation, can be accomplished only when the mind of the
seeker gets centred in right discriminative knowledge and
develops for itself a capacity to distinguish between the
300

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

permanent and the impermanent, the fleeting and the
lasting.
A Perfect Sage, who has thus cut himself free from all
attachments, with his mind well-balanced under the light
of his own "Wisdom," becomes completely liberated from
the chains of all moral debilities, ethical imperfections,
and sensuous appetites. Such a Sage too performs work
for the rest of his life in his perfected manifestations.
Krishna says that all such activities undertaken and
performed by him are ever done in a spirit of 'dedicated
activity' (Yajna). When a Sage thus functions in a spirit of
Yajna, that action itself does not and cannot produce any
reaction, or forging of thicker bondages with newlyformed vasanas.
The term 'Yajna,' borrowed from our scriptures, is
employed here by Krishna to yield a more elaborate sense
implying a wider and a more universal application. In the
Geeta, the Vedic Yajna has become "a self-dedicated
activity performed in a spirit of service to the many." All
actions, performed without ego, and not motivated by
one's ego-centric desires, fall under the category of Yajna.
All through the NEXT SIX STANZAS we get an
enumeration of something like twelve different Yajnas
which can be practised by everybody, on all occasions, in
every field, under all conditions.

301

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When a sage of the description given in the stanza,
performs actions in a spirit of Yajna, they dissolve away
without leaving any impression upon his mind, just as the
rainbow that disappears when the thin shower falling
against the sunlight ends.
IF THIS BE SO, THE QUESTION ARISES --- " FOR WHAT
REASON THEN DO ALL ACTIONS WHICH HE
PERFORMS
ENTIRELY
DISSOLVE,
WITHOUT
PRODUCING THEIR NATURAL RESULTS?" LISTEN
WHY IT IS SO:
24. BRAHMAN is the oblation; BRAHMAN is the clarified
butter, etc. , constituting the offerings; by BRAHMAN is the
oblation poured into the fire of BRAHMAN; BRAHMAN
verily shall be reached by him who always sees BRAHMAN in
all actions.
This is a famous stanza which is chanted throughout India
as a prayer at the table before the Hindus eat their meals,
although, today, ninety per cent of those who chant this
stanza before their meals do not understand or care to
follow its meaning. All the same it contains infinite
suggestions and almost summarises the entire philosophic
content of Vedanta.
The Infinite Reality, which is the changeless substratum
behind and beneath the changing panorama of the world,
is indicated by the Vedic term Brahman, and this is
contrasted with that aspect of Truth which functions in
302

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and through the body as the Atman. But though the
Eternal Truth has been thus indicated by two different
terms, Vedanta roars that "The Atman is Brahman."
The metaphor is borrowed from the very well-known
divine ritualism of the Vedas, the Yajnas. In every Yajna
there are four essential factors --- (1) the deity invoked to
whom the oblations are offered, (2) the fire in which the
offerings are poured, (3) the material things that constitute
the offerings and (4) the individual who is performing the
Yajna.
Here the stanza explains the mental attitude and the
experience of the Perfect-Sage when he performs the
Yajna. To him Truth alone exists and not the delusory
plurality which his erstwhile ignorance had conjured up
for him in his mind. Therefore, to him, all Yajnas arise
from Brahman; (III-14, 15) in which Brahman, the Truth, is
the performer; offering Brahman, the material; to the
sacred fire, which is also nothing other than Brahman;
invoking but Brahman. When one wave jumps over
another and breaks itself upto embrace and become one
with its comrade, we, who know that "all waves are
nothing but the ocean," can certainly understand that in
this act of union between two waves nothing has
happened except that the ocean rising over the ocean,
broke itself to become one with the ocean!!
If an individual can thus see the substratum, or the
essential nature, in and through, all names and forms,
303

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

actions and behaviours, to him, irrespective of all
conditions and circumstances, all beings and things are
but a remembrance of the Infinite Blissful Truth. If actions
are performed by a Saint, invoking no deity other than
Brahman, "ALL HIS ACTIONS DISSOLVE AWAY"
because he is invoking but the One Truth through all his
actions.
The significance of the stanza as "a prayer to be said
before food" is amply self-evident. To live we must eat.
Food is necessary for existence. Whatever be the type of
food, when one is hungry one will enjoy one's meals. The
suggestion is that even at this moment of natural
enjoyment, we are not to forget the great Truth that it is
Brahman eating Brahman, and that during our meals we are
offering to Brahman, the food that is Brahman, invoking
nothing but the grace of Brahman. To keep this idea
constantly in the mind is to get perfectly detached from
the enjoyment and raise ourselves to a greater and endless
beatitude which is the reward of Super-manhood.
AFTER REPRESENTING THE VERY SPIRIT IN ALL
"YAJNAS," THE LORD IS TRYING TO SHOW ARJUNA
HOW ALL THROUGH LIFE, ALL OUR ACTIONS CAN
BE CONVERTED TO BECOME A "YAJNA." RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE ("BHAVANA") MAKES EVERY ACT A
"YAJNA." LISTEN:

304

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

25. Some YOGIS perform sacrifice to DEVAS alone (DEVAYAJNA) ; while others offer "sacrifice" as sacrifice by the Self,
in the Fire of BRAHMAN (BRAHMA-YAJNA) .
In the following few stanzas, Lord Krishna is explaining
the mental attitude of a Saint-at-Work. One doubt is
generally raised by every intelligent student at all times.
The spiritual experience, no doubt, can be had when the
seeker in meditation transcends even his intellect. But
then, this transcendental experience is bound to remain
only for a limited time. The "Realised-Saint" is found
working in the world, sometimes, in an elaborate fashion,
like a Buddha or a Christ; in some cases he works in a
limited fashion, like a Ramana Maharshi, and at certain
moments he may not undertake any activity at all, but
merely continue living among the world-of-objects. Now
the doubt is: "what would be the mental attitude of such a
Perfect-Master when he comes in contact with the world
and functions in it?"
A Yogi is one who is always trying, through all the means
that are in him, to raise himself from his state of physical,
mental and intellectual imperfections to a more perfect
state of existence. In this sense of the term it would be
unjust to read into the stanza merely the obvious
meaning.
The word "Deva" comes from a root, meaning
'illumination.' Subjectively viewed, the greatest "Devas"
are the five sense organs: eyes illumining forms and
305

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

colours, ears illumining sounds, the nose illumining
smells, and the tongue and the skin illumining tastes and
touches. Seekers, and Perfected-Masters (Yogis) too, when
they move in the world, no doubt perceive sense-objects
through sense stimuli. But in their understanding and
experience, perception is but "a world of sense-objects
continuously offering themselves into the fires of his
perception in order to invoke the Devas (Senseperceptions)." Such seekers and masters walk out into life,
and when they come across the sense world, they only
recognise and experience that the world-of-objects is
paying a devoted tribute to the powers of senseperceptions!
When this mental attitude is entertained constantly by a
seeker he comes to feel completely detached from the
sense experiences and, irrespective of the quality of
experience, he is able to maintain a constant sense of
inward equanimity.
As contrasted with this method (Deva-Yajna) there are
others who perform Brahma-Yajna, says Krishna, wherein
they come to "OFFER THE SELF AS A SACRIFICE BY
THE SELF IN THE FIRE OF THE SELF." This statement
becomes perfectly clear when subjectively analysed and
understood. As long as we exist in the body manifestation,
we have to come across the world of sense-objects. The
outer-world can yield to us its joy or sorrow not by itself
but only as a result of our healthy or unhealthy attitude
306

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

towards it. The objects in themselves are impotent to give
us either joy or sorrow.
The Perfect Masters understand that the sense-organs are
only INSTRUMENTS-of-perception and that they can
work only when in contact with the Supreme, the Atman.
In this true understanding all Masters live, allowing the
sense-organs to sacrifice themselves in the Knowledge-ofBrahman. Seekers also are, by this statement, advised as to
how they too can gain a certain amount of freedom from
their senses by dedicating their sense-life in the service of
the world. When an individual's sense-organs of
perception and action are to function and act --- not for his
own ego-centric, selfish satisfactions but for the sake of
serving the society or the world --- then, even if such an
individual lives in the world-of-objects he will not be
enslaved by his attachments to his possessions.
AFTER THUS ENUMERATING THE "DEVA-YAJNA"
AND THE "BRAHMA-YAJNA," LORD KRISHNA
EXPOUNDS TWO MORE METHODS IN THE
FOLLOWING:
26. Some again offer hearing and other senses as sacrifice in the
fires-of-restraint; others offer sound and other objects of sense as
sacrifice in the fires-of-the-senses.
SOME OTHER GREAT MASTERS OFFER HEARING
AND OTHER SENSES IN THE FIRES-OF-RESTRAINT --In all these Yajnas described, the metaphor is taken from
307

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the most familiar ritualism known at the time to Arjuna.
Oblations were offered, in Vedic ritualism, into the sacredfire in order to invoke the blessings of the deity. In these
examples, we are shown how when some materials are
offered into a sacred-fire, not only the oblations get burnt
up and consumed by the fire, but also, as a result, a great
blessing accrues. Here, it is said that some Masters live on
in life constantly offering their senses into the fire-of-selfcontrol, so that the senses, of their own accord get burnt
up, contributing a greater freedom and joy in the inner life
of the man. It is also a fact, very well experienced by all of
us, that the more we try to satisfy the sense-organs the
more riotous they become and loot away our inner joy. By
self-control alone can the sense-organs be fully controlled
and mastered. This is yet another method shown to the
seekers by which they can come to experience and live a
more intense life of deeper meditation.
If in this method the "Path-of-Sense-control" is indicated,
in the second line the "Path-of-Mind-control" is suggested.
The mind is sustained and fed by the stimuli that reach it
from the outer world. The sense-objects perceived by the
organs create and maintain the mind. The mind can never
function in a field which cannot be interpreted in terms of
the five types of sense-objects. Therefore, to make the
mind non-receptive to the perceptions of the Indriyas is a
method by which one can gain a better poise in life for
purposes of meditation. Such an individual who has
controlled the mind completely and withdrawn it totally
from the sense-centres is indicated here when the Lord
308

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

says: "OTHERS OFFER SOUND AND OTHER OBJECTS
IN THE FIRES OF THE SENSES."
If the former method is a technique of controlling the
stimuli at the very gateway of the senses, the latter is a
different technique of controlling the same from the inner,
and therefore more subtle, level of perception, called the
mind.
AFTER THUS EXPLAINING THESE FOUR METHODS,
YET
ANOTHER
TECHNIQUE
HAS
BEEN
PROPOUNDED BY THE LORD IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA:
27. Others again sacrifice all the functions of the senses and the
functions of the breath (vital energy) in the fire of the YOGA of
self-restraint, kindled by knowledge.
ALL THE ACTIVITIES OF THE SENSE-ORGANS
(JNANA-INDRIYAS), AND THE ORGANS OF ACTION
(PRANA-INDIRYAS) ARE OFFERED INTO THE
KNOWLEDGE
KINDLED-FIRE
OF
RIGHT
UNDERSTANDING --- Control of the ego by the better
understanding of the Divine Reality is called here as the
"Yoga-of-Self-restraint' (ATMA-SAMYAMA-YOGA).
The "Path-of-Discrimination" (Vichara) lies through a
constant attempt at distinguishing between the limited lot
of the ego and the divine destinies of the Spirit. Having
discriminated thus, to live more and more as the Self, and
309

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

not as the ego, is to "RESTRAIN THE SELF BY THE SELF
(Atma-Samyama)." By this process, it is evident how the
mad ramblings of the organs of perceptions and actions
can be completely restrained and entirely conquered.
EXHAUSTING
THE
ABOVE-MENTIONED
FIVE
DIFFERENT TECHNIQUES, AS THOUGH TO BRING TO
THE UNDERSTANDING OF ARJUNA, THAT A
HUNDRED OTHER METHODS CAN BE INDICATED,
KRISHNA ENUMERATES IN HASTE FIVE MORE
DIFFERENT METHODS IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
28. Others again offer wealth, austerity and YOGA as sacrifice,
while the ascetics of self-restraint and rigid vows offer study of
scriptures and knowledge as sacrifice.
OFFERING OF WEALTH (Dravya-Yajna) --- Sacrifice of
wealth is to be understood in its largest connotation.
Charity and distribution of honestly acquired wealth, in a
sincere spirit of devotion to and in the service of the
community, or of the individual who is the recipient of the
benevolence, is called Dravya-Yajna. This includes more
than a mere offering of money or food.
The term Dravya includes everything that we possess, not
only in the world outside but also in our worlds of
emotions and ideas. To pursue thus a life of charity,
serving the world as best as we can, with all that we
possess physically, mentally and intellectually is the noble
sacrifice called "Wealth sacrifice."
310

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In order to perform this it is not at all necessary that the
devotee should be materially rich. Even if we are poor and
physically DEBILITATED, from our bed of pain and
penury, we can still be charitable, because our inner
treasurers of love, kindness, sympathy and affection, do
not at all depend either upon our material circumstances
nor on our physical condition. Sometimes, a word of
sincere sympathy, a look of love, a smile of true affection,
or a word registering true friendship, can give to the
receiver more than a heartless cheque, even if it be for a
very fat sum.
Tapo-yajna --- Some live, offering unto their Lord, a life of
austerity. There is no religion in the world which does not
prescribe, by some method or the other, periods of austere
living. These austerities (Vratas) are invariably undertaken
in the name of the Lord. It is very well-known that the
Lord of Compassion, who feeds and sustains even the
lowliest of the low, can gain no special joy because of a
devotee's self-denial. But it is generally done in a spirit of
dedication, so that the seeker might achieve some selfcontrol. This activity, in some extreme cases very painful
indeed, is undertaken in order that the devotee may learn
to control himself in his sense-life.
Yoga-yajna --- An earnest attempt of the lesser in us to
grow into a better standard of diviner living, is called
Yoga. In this attempt, devoted worship of the Lord-of-theheart, called Upasana, is a primary method. This worship
and love, offered to the Lord-of-the-heart, when
311

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

performed without any desire or motive, is also called
Yoga, since it directly hastens the seeker's selfdevelopment.
Swadhyaya-yajna --- The daily deep study of the scriptures
is called Swadhyaya. Without a complete study of the
scriptures we will not be in a position to know the logic of
what we are doing in the name of spiritual practice, and
without this knowledge our practices cannot gain the edge
and the depth that are essential for sure progress. Thus, in
all religions, the daily study of the scriptures is insisted
upon, as an essential training during the seeker's early
days. Even after Self-realisation, we find that the Sages
spend all their spare-time reading and contemplating
upon the inexhaustible wealth of details and suggestions
in the scriptures.
In its subjective implications, Swadhyaya means "self-study
including the art of introspection pursued for
understanding our own inner weaknesses." If, in the case
of a seeker, it is a technique of estimating his own spiritual
progress, in the case of a Seer, it will be for revelling in his
own Self.
Jnana-yajna --- The Sacrifice-of-Knowledge: this word has
very often been used in the Geeta and it constitutes one of
the many original terms coined out by Vyasa to beautify
the Lord's declarations. The "Sacrifice-of-Knowledge" is
the term given to that activity in man by which he
renounces all his ignorance into the fire-of-knowledge
312

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

kindled BY him, IN him. This is constituted of two
aspects; negation of the false, and assertion of the Real
Nature of the Self. These two activities are effectively
undertaken during the seeker's meditation.
All these five methods of Self-development --- " sacrificeof-wealth," "austerity," "Yoga," "study" and "knowledge" --can be practised with profit only by those who are men of
"rigid determination" and who can find in themselves an
inexhaustible enthusiasm to apply themselves consistently
to reach this great goal. It is not sufficient that we know
these paths, or that we decide to gain these developments.
Progress in spirituality can come only to one who is
"sincere and consistent in his practices" (Yatayah).
IN THE FOLLOWING VERSE KRISHNA EXPLAINS
PRANAYAMA AS YET ANOTHER METHOD, THE
ELEVENTH IN THE SERIES:
29. Others offer as sacrifice the out-going breath in the incoming, and the in-coming in the out-going, restraining the
courses of the out-going and in-coming breaths, solely absorbed
in the restraint of breath.
In this verse we have a description of the technique of
'breath-control' regularly practised by some seekers, in
order to keep themselves under perfect self-control, when
they move amidst the sense-objects in the work-a-day
world.
313

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

As a sacrifice some offer "THE OUT-GOING BREATH
INTO THE IN-COMING BREATH AND OTHERS OFFER
THE IN-COMING INTO THE OUT-GOING." The latter is,
in the technique of Pranayama, called the Puraka, meaning
the 'process of filing in'; while, the former is the 'process of
blowing out,' technically called the Rechaka. These two
processes are alternated with an interval, wherein the
'breath is held for sometime,' within and without, which is
called the Kumbhaka. This process of Puraka-KumbhakaRechaka-Kumbhaka, when practised in a prescribed ratio,
becomes the technique of breath-control (Pranayama). This
technique is again explained here as a Yajna by which the
practitioner, in the long run, learns to offer all the
subsidiary Pranas into the main Prana.
Prana is not the breath; this is a general misunderstanding.
Through breath-control we come to gain a perfect mastery
over the activities of the Pranas in us. When very closely
observed, we find that the term Prana used in the Hindu
Scriptures indicates the various "manifested activities of
life in a living body." They generally enumerate five
different kinds of Pranas, which, when understood
correctly, are found to be nothing but the five different
physiological-functions in every living body.
They are: (1) the function of perception, (2) the function of
excretion, (3) the function of digestion and assimilation,
(4) the circulatory system, which distributes the food to all
parts of the body, and lastly (5) the capacity in a livingcreature to improve himself in his mental outlook and
314

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

intellectual life. These activities of life within, about which
an ordinary man is quite unconscious, are brought under
the perfect control of the individual through the process of
Pranayama, so that a seeker can, by this path, come to gain
a complete capacity to withdraw all his perceptions. This
is indeed a great help to a meditator.
IN THIS SERIES OF TECHNIQUES ENUMERATED BY
KRISHNA, AS A LAST METHOD, WE HAVE IN THE
FOLLOWING STANZA THE TWELFTH METHOD
DETAILED:
30. Others, with well-regulated diet, offer vital-airs in the VitalAir. All these are knowers of sacrifice, whose sins are destroyed
by sacrifice.
There are some who, through systematic regulation of
their diet, come to gain a complete mastery over
themselves and their appetites and passions. Dieting is not
at all a new technique in India. The ancient Rishis not only
knew the vitamin-contents and the caloric-values of the
various food materials, but also prescribed very scientific
combinations of the available vegetables and cereals to
suit the temperament, function, and duties of persons
belonging to different levels of society. Not only this; they
so well perfected their knowledge that they even showed
how, through regulated dieting, a man's character and
behaviour, and ultimately his very cultural quality, can be
purified and raised.
315

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The verse adds that all these "KNOWERS OF Yajna,"
meaning all those who know "the art of living these
techniques," when they practice them in a spirit of selfdedication and selfless enthusiasm, can fully come to
profit by them. These methods and techniques do not
promise that they will, of themselves, guide us or lead us
to the Supreme. It is promised that all those who practise
all, or a few, or even one of them for a sufficiently long
period, can become "PURIFIED OF THEIR SINS."
Sin, we have already discussed, is but a wrong pattern of
thought-channels that is etched in a mind by
devolutionary thoughts, entertained by a deluded ego in
its extreme misunderstanding and its consequent
attachment with the body and sense-objects. It is these
sinful vasanas that make the ego act like an animal and
force it to commit low and vicious criminalities. The
above-mentioned practices not only wipe clean the
existing wrong-vasanas but cut out in their place newchannels-of-thoughts, more constructive and evolutionary
in their very nature.
Thus, it must be carefully noted that all practices, physical,
mental, or intellectual, that are generally known as divine
and religious, are, without exception, only techniques by
which the mind-and-intellect equipment gets adjusted for
greater and more effective self-application in meditation.
Meditation is the "path" in which the ego learns to
withdraw its false evaluations of itself in particular, and of
life in general, and comes to the final experience of its own
316

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

divine nature. We often find sincere seekers getting so
extremely attached to their own "path" of practice that
they constantly argue about it among themselves.
Therefore, Arjuna has been instructed here that all "paths,"
however noble and great they may be, are all but means,
and not an end in themselves.
IN ALL THE ABOVE-ENUMERATED TWELVE
DIFFERENT "YAJNA-TECHNIQUES," SELF-EFFORT IS A
COMMON FACTOR, AND THEREFORE, THE LORD
SAYS:
31. The eaters of the nectar --- remnant of the sacrifice --- go to
the Eternal BRAHMAN. Even this world is not for the nonperformer of sacrifice; how then the other (world) , O best of the
Kurus?
EATING THE SACRED REMNANT OF THE Yajna --- In
the ancient ritualism of fire-sacrifices, things that were 'left
over' in the pot from which the offerings were made, were
called the "sacred remains," and they were considered by
the devotees as divinely potent-remnants from the Lord's
own plates. This was generally eaten by the devotees with
great reverence, and it was considered that, thereby their
minds would get purified.
In the metaphor used here, when we try to find its
corresponding implication in the subjective world, we
must understand "the remnant that is left over" to mean
"the result of the above-mentioned twelve types of Yajnas."
317

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The result of any one of the above 'Yajnas' is, as we know,
a greater amount of self-control and the consequent inner
integration of the individual personality. Those who have
gained this have prepared themselves for the greatest
vocation in life called 'intense meditation.'
Such an integrated man can gain a greater inner poise in
his meditation through which he can easily come to
experience the Infinite and the Eternal, indicated by the
term Brahman. The second line of the verse contains a
beautiful generalisation which clinches the main idea, that
self-development and inner growth cannot be had without
investing continuous and sincere self-effort. Inaction can
never bring about any profit even in this world, in any
field whatsoever. Without self-dedicated and selfless
activity, no great and enduring profit can be achieved in
this world, and therefore, Krishna exclaims: "How could a
seeker hope to achieve the Highest without any conscious
effort at gaining it?"
Two doubts can arise in the minds of ruthlessly intelligent
students. It may be doubted: "Can all these different
'paths' lead us to one and the same goal, or do they lead to
different goals?" It may also be doubted: "Are these not
mere intellectual theories propounded by Krishna himself
as an original contribution to Hindu thought?"
THE FOLLOWING EXPLAINS THESE TWO DOUBTS:

318

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

32. Thus innumerable sacrifices lie spread out before
BRAHMAN --- (literally at the mouth or face of BRAHMAN )
--- Know them all as born of action, and thus knowing, you shall
be liberated.
In the world, no two different activities produce the same
set of results. The twelve different Yajnas described so far,
are all conspicuously different from one another, and so
they must all be producing not an identical result but a
series of different effects. In order to show that though the
"paths" are different, all of them ultimately lead to the
same goal, it is said here: "Various Yajnas lie open, leading
to the gate of Brahman, the ETERNAL." Just as 'all roads
lead to Rome,' all the above-mentioned techniques of
Yajna also ultimately lead to one and the same goal.
KNOW THEM ALL TO BE BORN OF ACTION --- This
timely reminder of the Lord has more than one direct
suggestion: (a) these "paths" prescribed in the Vedas are all
to be pursued through self-effort, and therefore, Arjuna is
reminded of the inevitability of right action, if he wants to
move ahead in his cultural self-development; and (b) it
also suggests that all these "paths" are only the means and
not the end. Action is born of "desires," and, therefore, as
long as there is action there is no redemption from
"desires." The "State-of-Desirelessness" is the "State-ofPerfection," and therefore, in the context of our
understanding, these pregnant words of the verse ring a
note of warning that we should not misunderstand these
Yajnas as the very goal of life.
319

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

UNDERSTANDING THUS, YOU SHALL BE FREE --Here the word "understanding" is not a mere intellectual
apprehension but a complete spiritual comprehension, in
a vivid subjective experience of Reality.
Right-Knowledge was represented as a "Knowledgesacrifice" (IV-24). Then, several sacrifices have been
mentioned. Knowledge is now being extolled, as
compared with these latter kinds of sacrifices, which are
all means of attaining the Purushartha --- the inner
integration.
33. Superior is "knowledge-sacrifice" to "Sacrifice-with-objects,
" O Parantapa. All actions in their entirety, O Partha,
culminate in Knowledge.
Krishna compares the Dravya-Yajna --- the sacrifice of
material oblations --- with Jnana-Yajna, and declares that,
for cultural self-development, Jnana-Yajna is any day
nobler and diviner than mere formalistic ritualism with
material offerings (Dravya-Yajna).
In the second line of the verse the Lord explains how and
why He considers "the sacrifice of 'ignorance'in
Knowledge" (Jnana-Yajna) as greater and nobler than "the
sacrifice of food and other materials in the sacred fire"
(Dravya-Yajna). Ritualistic Karmas produce results to enjoy
which the individual ego has to take up new
manifestations, wherein again, he has yet to undertake
and perform more and more activities. Karma never ends
320

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Karma, and therefore, action cannot be a complete
fulfilment in itself.
On the other hand, Right-Knowledge (Jnana) ends all
Karmas, once and for all, inasmuch as the deluded-ego
destroys itself in the light-of-Self-Knowledge. We have
already seen that 'ignorance'causes 'desires,' and desires
are the seeds from which all actions arise. When this
'ignorance,' the primary source of all activities, ends at the
dawn of 'Knowledge,' all actions naturally get fulfilled.
Therefore, "ALL ACTION IN ITS ENTIRETY, O PARTHA,
ATTAINS ITS CONSUMMATION IN KNOWLEDGE."
IF THUS, BY 'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE WE CAN REALLY
GAIN THE FULLEST SATISFACTION, THEN HOW ARE
WE TO GAIN THIS 'KNOWLEDGE' BY WHICH ALL
ACTIONS CAN AT ONCE BE BURNT UP AND
EXHAUSTED?
34. Know that by long prostration, by question, and service, the
"wise" who have realised the Truth will instruct you in (that)
'Knowledge. '
The verse explains the qualities that are necessary in a
teacher, who alone can instruct us on the "Path-ofKnowledge" and guide us to the great consummation in
all life. It also explains the mental attitude and the
intellectual approach which a successful student must
adopt, so that his contact with the Guru may be fruitful.
321

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PROSTRATING YOURSELF --- All that is meant here is
that the student must have an intellectual attitude of
surrender and meekness, respect and obedience, when he
approaches the teacher who has to instruct him upon the
secret-of-life. Regarding the world within and the
methods of its control, ordinarily, the students are
completely ignorant, and therefore, they must approach
the teacher with a readiness to understand, grasp and
follow his instructions.
Just as water flows always from a higher to a lower level,
so too, 'knowledge' can flow only to a lower level. It is,
therefore, necessary that the student must have a "spirit of
prostration" in him so that he may be able to get himself
surcharged with the 'Knowledge' that flows from the
teacher. Thus the prostration, as used here, essentially
defines more, the required mental and intellectual attitude
of the student, than his physical readiness to fall-flat on
the ground at the feet of his Master.
BY QUESTIONS --- By raising doubts to the teacher we
are opening up the cistern of 'Knowledge' locked up in the
Master's bosom. A perfect Guru immediately detects from
the questions, the false line of thinking in the student, and
while removing the very doubt, he imperceptibly orders
and reorganises the right-way of thinking in the inner
thought-life of the student. When this intellectual
wrestling has been practised for a long time, the fragrance
of perfection in the teacher, as it were, gets transferred to
the student's life!
322

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Therefore, it has been an immortal tradition among the
Hindus to have open discussions between the teacher and
the taught, called Satsanga. This privilege is not available
in all religions of the world. In fact, Vedanta alone thus
dares to proclaim a perfect freedom for the intellect. It
never trades upon the blind faith of the seekers. In all
other religions, faith is a great power and force, and
therefore, many of the intellectual imperfections in their
Scriptures cannot be completely answered; and the priests
therein must necessarily check the full freedom of the
seekers to question their sacred texts.
BY SERVICE --- The offering of flowers and sweetmeats is
not what constitutes seva. These have been understood as
the service of the teacher only as a by-product of
institutionalism and Ashrama organisation. A true service
of the teacher lies in the attempt of the student to attune
himself to the principles of life advocated and advised to
him by the Master. To live the life indicated by the Rishis
is the greatest seva that an imperfect mortal can offer to the
Man-of-Perfection.
The two main qualifications essential for a fully useful
teacher on the spiritual path are: (a) a perfect knowledge
of scriptural literature and (b) a complete subjective
experience of the Infinite Reality. These two factors are
indicated here. Each, without the other, is totally useless
in guiding a seeker. Mere knowledge of the Scriptures can
make only a learned Pandita and not a Perfect-Master. A
man of intimate experience of Truth will, in himself,
323

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

become completely silent, because he will find it
impossible to explain and express his own transcendental
experience to other seekers.
BY THIS THE LORD MEANS TO SAY THAT, THAT
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE, WHICH IS IMPARTED BY
THOSE WHO HAVE REALISED THE TRUTH --- THAT
'KNOWLEDGE'
ALONE
AND
NO
OTHER
'KNOWLEDGE' --- CAN PROVE EFFECTIVE. THEN THE
FOLLOWING STATEMENT HOLDS GOOD:
35. Knowing that, you shall not, O Pandava, again get deluded
like this; and by that, you shall see all beings in your Self, and
also in Me.
After all these painful troubles, it may chance that we may
get 'Knowledge,' but after one's death one may again fall
back to 'ignorance'and come to repeat the same process.
Even in our own life-time there have been many things
learnt and experienced which we do not now remember.
Similarly, this 'Knowledge' also may be lost to us in which
case it will be indeed a great loss.
This doubt is fully cleared here by an assertive, confident
declaration that after regaining this 'Knowledge,' "YOU
SHALL NOT, O PANDAVA, AGAIN GET DELUDED
LIKE THIS." This declaration, rather fanatical in style, has
to be, for the time being, accepted by all seekers. All
teachers unanimously declare this idea and since they
have no particular reason to deceive their generation, it is
324

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

but intelligent that we should accept the truth of this
declaration in good faith --- till we come to confirm it in
our own personal experience.
No doubt, an immature child can never understand the
physical thrills of the nuptial chamber, and thereby it
cannot be said that the newly-weds are always telling
lies!! The little child has not matured enough even to feel
sympathetically the thrills explained. Similarly, we, living
in delusion, cannot UNDERSTAND the thrills of the
transcendental, or EXPERIENCE its Eternal Nature --however vividly the teachers may explain, until we also
grow to the required inner maturity.
By this rediscovery of the Self, Krishna promises that the
Pandava Prince will thereafter be able to recognise the
entire creation --- constituted of the world of objects,
emotions, and ideas --- as nothing other than the Self,
which is his own real Nature; which again is nothing other
than 'Me', Lord Krishna, the Paramatman. Having for once
realised the ocean, all the waves are recognised by the
intelligent-eye as nothing but the ocean.
In this stanza, thus, tests of having realised "that
Knowledge" --- discussed in the previous stanzas, are
given. It also indicates how long we must hold on to the
apron of a true Guru. As long as we have not realised that
the whole creation is nothing but our own Self, which is as
divine and omnipotent as the Lord of Dwarka Himself, so
long we cannot afford to leave our intimate relationship
325

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and complete dependence upon the Preceptor and Guide,
the Guru.
MOREOVER, SEE HOW EXCELLENT 'KNOWLEDGE' IS:
36. Even if you are the most sinful of all sinners, yet you shall
verily cross all sins by the raft of 'Knowledge. '
While Arjuna was promised such a glorious
transcendental experience, too divine for him to believe,
he felt a certain amount of lack of confidence in himself,
which was, perhaps, reflected, on his face. He had a
feeling that he was not fit for such a great inner
experience. Such a feeling can come to anyone of us,
because there is none among the intelligent who is not
painfully conscious of his own shortcomings.
Vedanta is not a philosophy that heartlessly keeps the
sinners out of its halls of wisdom. It does not believe that
there is any lost soul who will ever wander among the
heathens, and who can ONLY be redeemed IF he enters
the portals of the Church of Vedanta!! Tolerant to a fault,
Vedanta declares the Truth and nothing but the Truth. The
All-pervading Divine manifests everywhere and therefore,
there is no sinner who cannot, through his endeavour,
come to claim his own heritage of Absolute Perfection.
The Geeta is a scripture of life written for man, and its
universality is unmistakably seen in the statement here. It
assures man that "EVEN IF HE BE THE MOST SINFUL
326

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

AMONG THE SINFUL," he too can cross over his painful
destinies of the present and reach the shores that lie
beyond finitude and imperfections. Such a clear charter of
man's right to the Divine has never so far been written in
any other existing scripture of the world!!
To rediscover that, in reality, the ego is nothing other than
the Self in us, and to live thereafter as the Self of all, is
called true 'Wisdom' (Jnana). Having thus awakened to
our Real Nature, the dreamy cravings of the flesh can no
more enchant us away from our pristine glory and make
us run down the channels of sensuousness, to wreck
ourselves on the stony bed of sin and sorrow. This is
indicated by a beautiful metaphor: "BY THE RAFT OF
'KNOWLEDGE' ALONE SHALL YOU GO ACROSS ALL
SINS."
IN WHAT MANNER DOES THIS WISDOM DESTROY
SIN?... HERE IS AN EXAMPLE:
37. As the blazing fire reduces fuel to ashes, O Arjuna, so does
the Fire-of-Knowledge reduce all actions to ashes.
JUST AS FIRE REDUCES FUEL TO ASHES --- This
example has been given by the Lord in His sheer fatherly
love for Arjuna. These words, familiar in all Yajnashalas,
when used apart from their word meaning, are capable of
creating, in their association, brilliant suggestions of a
serene atmosphere and a thrilled sense of divinity.
327

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Besides, the example is very striking. Whatever be the
quality, shape, condition, colour, etc., of the fuel pieces,
when all of them are taken to the fire-place and digested
by the fire, they become one homogeneous mass of ash! In
the samples of ash left in the hearth we cannot recognise
the ash of a particular twig as different from that of
another. Similarly, all Karmas, it is said, good, bad, or
indifferent, get burnt up in the 'Fire of Knowledge' and
will become something altogether different from what
they were in their cause-and-effect condition. Solid fuel
having girth, weight, smell, etc., becomes almost
weightless, with no specific colour except a light-greyness,
when it comes to the final state of ash.
Actions leave reactions. The reactions mature at different
periods of time depending upon the quality and intensity
of the actions. From beginningless time, in our different
manifestations, we have been, at every moment, acting in
our ego-centric vanity and individuality. All those actions
must have left their residual impressions and they have to
be lived through.
This entire Karma has been scientifically considered as
falling under three classifications. They are called "not yet
operative" (Sanchita), "operative" (Prarabdha), and "to be
operative in future" (Agami). When, in the Geeta, it is said
that all Karmas are burnt down, the Lord means the entire
Sanchita and Agami.

328

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHEREFORE:
38. Certainly, there is no purifier in this world like 'Knowledge.
' He who is himself perfected in YOGA finds it in the Self in
time.
So glorious is the result of Self-realisation that Lord
Krishna explodes in enthusiasm and cries: "VERILY
THERE EXISTS NOTHING IN THIS WORLD MORE
NOBLE AND SACRED THAN SELF-KNOWLEDGE." Just
as to a drowning man there is nothing more precious than
a life-belt, so too, to the deluded ego there cannot be a
greater possession and a nobler endeavour than the
acquisition of 'Knowledge' of its own Real Nature.
The Knowledge of the Self can be attained in one's own
bosom when one has gained in oneself a full "MASTERY
IN Yoga" --- when one has sincerely and diligently
practised the above-mentioned twelve Yajnas and gained a
complete self-mastery through them. This mastery of the
Self over the flesh is not given by any teacher. The
traditional story of a teacher spiritualising a student by his
touch is a myth; it is impossible. Had it been so, in the
presence of such a perfect Prophet like Krishna, Arjuna
could have attained --- especially when the Lord felt such
a great friendliness and love towards him --- in a wink, all
the spirituality needed to become a God-man.
Many devotees have, from time to time, wasted their
chances and brought dishonour to their noble teachers,
329

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

because they expected their Gurus to impart their acquired
Wisdom to them, their Chelas (disciples), for the physical
services rendered or the intellectual support given. Many
of the existing seekers are, today, thoughtlessly
squandering away their noble opportunities by vainly
waiting for this cheap and ready method of purchasing
God-hood! Let them be warned that, in spite of such
glorifications of some Gurus available in the market and
sold at some Ashramas in this country, it has no scriptural
support. Here, Krishna, in all love, plainly tells the truth to
Arjuna that he has to purify himself (Swayam) and then he
himself will realise the Truth "in good time" (Kalena).
No definite time schedule is promised for Perfection to
manifest. It is only said that he who is practising sincerely
and devotedly, all the twelve different subjective-Yajnas
that are described earlier, will attain the necessary growth
within, and will "IN GOOD TIME" come to experience the
Self, the Beatitude-of-Perfection, the State of God-hood.
IN GOOD TIME (Kalena) --- This does not mean either
immediately, nor does it promise us the Supreme only
after trillions of impossible years. The same idea has been
more beautifully described in the following stanza by a
more self-explanatory term "ere long" (Achirena). It gives a
direct suggestion of hope and guidance to all seekers of all
times that they need not become impatient and that, in
fact, it would be far better for them constantly to apply
themselves on the right path in the full confidence that
they shall "ere long" reach their goal.
330

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE SUREST MEANS OF ACQUIRING WISDOM IS
DECLARED AS FOLLOWS:
39. The man who is full of faith, who is devoted to It, and who
has subdued the senses, obtains (this) 'Knowledge' ; and having
obtained 'Knowledge, ' ere long he goes to the Supreme Peace.
The qualities that are necessary for an individual to be
assured of the Knowledge-Divine are being enumerated
here as vividly as from the leaf of a Science text-book.
Three great qualities have been indicated and to
understand them is to understand why the so-called
seekers, in spite of their claims to sincere self-application,
do not actually reach anywhere near the ladder of
development. Faith, devotion, and self-control are the
three imperative necessities to be acquired ere we can
hope to evolve to the diviner stature from our present
mortal encumbrances. But these three words are more
often misunderstood than rightly evaluated.
FAITH (Shraddha) --- Exploiters of religions have been
making capital out of repeating this word as their safest
excuse for all problems spiritual, to clear which devotees
may approach these men who pose themselves as guides
in religion. Invariably, we find that the ordinary devotees
are completely rendered, sometimes fanatical and often
poorer, in their intellectual and mental growth, because of
the unintelligent insistence of Shraddha translated as "blind
331

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

faith and unquestioned acceptance of any declaration said
to be divine."
Shankara tolls the death-knell of this misunderstanding
when he explains Shraddha as "that by which an individual
readily understands the exact import of the scriptural text
as well as the pregnant words of advice of the preceptor."
DEVOTED TO IT (Tatparah) --- Whatever be the 'path' of
divine self-development that he may be following, it is an
unavoidable necessity that the seeker must give his
undivided attention to it, and must, on all occasions,
maintain in his mind a continuous consciousness of the
Divine. A mere intellectual study of the scriptures will not
help us in purifying and shaping our "within' to the
glorious Beauty of the Divine. It is necessary that we must
pour out our mind and intellect into the scheme of living
that the Upanishads advise.
WHO HAS SUBDUED THE SENSES --- The Shraddha and
Jnana explained above will not sustain themselves, and no
seeker can consistently hope to entertain them unless he is
constantly striving his best to live in a spirit of self-control.
It is the sense-organs that seduce us away into the life of
excessive sensuousness, and when one has entered into
the troubled waters of a sensuous life, one has no chances
of maintaining oneself quietly in the higher values of life.
To walk the Path-Divine is to get out of the gutters-ofsensuousness. Excessive sense-life and Absolute God-life
are antitheses to each other; where the one is, the other
332

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

cannot be. Where the light of inward serenity and deeper
peace have come, the darkness created by sense passions
and animal appetites must depart. It is imperative,
therefore, that a seeker should learn to live in steady and
constant sense-control.
Why should we live renouncing sense enjoyments, and
employing our mind in remembering constantly the
Divine goal of life, with faith both in ourselves and in the
science of religion? Ordinarily, an intellect can enquire
only as to the cause-and-effect of things. The ego is ever
employed in its own motive-hunting. A seeker in the
initial stages of his self-development remains constantly in
his intellect. Naturally, he will enquire what the result of
such a conspicuous sacrifice would be. To convince him,
the second line is given.
That a seeker who lives the above-mentioned tripleprogramme of Divine life, reaches the State-of'Knowledge' is the promise and guarantee of the Rishis,
who are the authors of the immortal scriptures. A doubt
again arises as to why we should, after all, acquire the
'Knowledge-Divine.' Krishna explains here that, having
gained the right-knowledge, the individual "SOON
REACHES THE SUPREME PEACE." The promise of
reaching the great Goal-of-life is not guaranteed to take
effect in a definite period of time. Just as, in the previous
stanza, it was said, "In good time" (Kalena), so too, here it
is said, "Ere long" (Achirena). In short, after gaining this
'Knowledge,' one would "soon" reach the Goal-of-life.
333

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SUPREME PEACE (Param Shantim) --- The Goal-of-life is
labelled here as the "Great Peace" that knows no
diminution. In these days of peace-mongers getting ready
for war in the name of peace, one is apt to become
honestly sceptical about the goal indicated in this stanza.
The term 'peace' here is not that undefined vague concept,
that is often repeated in politics, whenever it is convenient
for a set of politicians to do so, but the term Shanti has a
wealth of psychological suggestiveness.
It is very well-known that every living creature is, at all
moments, trying to gain a better happiness, through all its
activities in life. From breathing and eating, to the
organised endeavour in capturing the world-market
through war and destruction, all activities are attempts by
the frail individuals to discover a greater and a better joy
or happiness. This is true not only in man but in the
animal kingdom, and even in the vegetable world. In
short, no action is possible unless the actor is motivated by
an inner urge in him to seek a greater sense of fulfilment
or joy unto himself.
If thus, the whole world is striving to win the highest joy
that it possibly can, and having gained it, to invest all
energy and intelligence to retain the same, then the goal of
life should be ABSOLUTE-HAPPINESS, where all strife
ends, all desires are fulfilled, all thoughts and agitations
are finally exhausted. Desires for joy give rise to thought
disturbances, which, trying to fulfil themselves in the
outer world, become the visible actions in everyday life.
334

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The restlessness of the mind and the weary fatigue of the
body shall both end, when Absolute Joy is attained.
Therefore, Absolute Joy is Absolute Peace.
Here, in this stanza the Goal-of-life is indicated as the
Supreme Peace, which may be, in other words, explained
as the Supreme Joy.

THOU SHALT NOT DOUBT THIS, FOR DOUBT IS
MOST SINFUL. HOW?... LISTEN:
40. The ignorant, the faithless, the doubting-self goes to
destruction; there is neither this world, nor the other, nor
happiness for the doubter.
In the previous verse it was said that those who had faith
and knowledge would soon reach the Supreme Peace. In
order to hammer this very same Truth in, Krishna is here
emphasising through a negative declaration that they,
who have NOT these qualities cultivated, gained and
developed in them, will get themselves ultimately
destroyed and completely ruined. He who has neither the
"Knowledge-of-the-Self" --- if not a spiritual realisation, at
least a clear intellectual understanding --- nor "the
intellectual readiness to grapple with and fully
understand the true import of the scriptural declarations
and the words of the Masters" (Shraddha), Krishna asserts,
335

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

will certainly get ruined, if he be also a 'doubting Thomas'
(Samshaya-atma).
In the next line, Krishna, with all emphasis, condemns
such men of endless doubts, and points out their tragedy
in life. The Lord says that such men who "DOUBT THE
SELF" will not find any joy or happiness ANYWHERE --- "
NEITHER HERE NOR IN THE HEREAFTER." In
explaining thus, the Geeta seems to express that there may
be a small chance perhaps, for one who is devoid of
knowledge and faith to discover some kind of a happiness
in this world, here and now, but that those who are
constant doubters can enjoy neither here nor there. Such
men are psychologically incapable of enjoying any
situation, because the doubting tendency in them will
poison all their experiences. He whose teeth have become
septic must constantly poison the food that he is taking; so
too, those who have this tendency of doubting everything,
will never be able to accommodate themselves to any
situation, however perfect and just it might be. The line
contains a spot of satire, almost vitriolic in its pungency,
when it is directed against the intelligent sceptic.
WHEREFORE: --- FOR THIS REASON ONLY:
41. He who has renounced actions by YOGA, whose doubts are
rent asunder by 'Knowledge, ' who is self-possessed, actions do
not bind him, O Dhananjaya.

336

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This being the penultimate verse in the chapter, it is a
beautiful summary of all the main secrets-of-life explained
at length in it. When, through the practice of Karma Yoga,
we have learnt to renounce our attachments to the fruitsof-action, and yet to work on in perfect detachment --when every doubt in us regarding the Goal-of-life has
been completely removed in our own inner experiences of
the nobler and the diviner in us --- as a result of the above
two, the ego comes to rediscover itself to be nothing other
than the Atman. Then the individual ego comes to live
"POISED IN THE SELF AS THE SELF." When such an
individual works, his actions can never bind him.
It is only egoistic activities motivated by our ego-centric
desires that leave gross impressions on our inner
personality, and thus painfully bind us to reap their
reactions. With a sense of detachment and in rightknowledge, as indicated in the above scheme, when an
individual has completely destroyed his ego-sense, his
actions cannot bind him at all. As a dreamer, I might
commit a murder in my dream, of my dream-wife, but
when I awake from my dream, I shall not be punished for
the crime that I seem to have committed in my dream. For,
the dreamer has also ended along with the dream. The
dreamer committed the murder and deserves punishment;
but in the waker, the dreamer is absent. Similarly, the egocentric actions can bind and throttle only the ego, but
when the ego has become Atmavantah, meaning "POISED
IN THE SELF" --- just like the dreamer when he gets
poised in the waker --- the activities of the ego can no
337

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

more bind the Self. The ego "POISED IN THE SELF," is the
experience of the Real Self; the dreamer poised in the
waker, is the waker.
THIS BEING THE WONDROUS RESULT AND THE
SUPREME PROFIT THAT 'TRUE-KNOWLEDGE' CAN
GIVE TO THE DELUDED, KRISHNA ADVISES ARJUNA:
42. Therefore with the sword-of-Knowledge, cut asunder the
doubt-of-the-Self, born of 'ignorance, ' residing in your heart,
and take refuge in "YOGA. " Arise, O Bharata.
In this concluding stanza the Lord's advice is precise and
it is given with a loving insistence. The stanza rings with a
spirit of paternal urgency felt by the Lord towards the
Pandava Prince.
In the language of war, Krishna advises his warrior-friend
on the battle-field, how best to live the life of dedication
and perfection as advised by the Hindu Rishis from the
quiet and peaceful Himalayan valleys. With the "SWORDOF-KNOWLEDGE," Arjuna is encouraged to cut off the
bonds of ignorance and 'CLEAVE ASUNDER THIS
DOUBT-OF-THE-SELF LYING IN THE HEART."
The spiritual doubt is explained here as working from the
heart. This may read rather strange to a modern man:
doubt must come from the intellect; it cannot come from
the heart.
338

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is the traditional belief in Vedanta that "the intellect is
seated in the heart," wherein the term HEART does not
mean the fleshy pumping-instrument in the human
bosom. The term HEART is used here not in its
physiological meaning but in its literacy usage, where
HEART means "the source of all love and sympathy --- of
all noble human emotions." An intellect functioning from
and through an atmosphere of sympathetic love, kindly
charity and such other noble qualities alone can be
considered in the science of philosophy as the human
reason. Therefore, when the Upanishads talk of the doubts
lying crystallised in the heart, the Rishis mean the
intellectual perversions in some of the seekers that make
them incompetent to feel and appreciate the Vision-of-theSoul.
These doubts can be completely annihilated only when
the individual gains an intimate, subjective experience of
the Self in him.
This can be achieved only by Yoga --- NOT a strange
mystical process, secretly advised to a few, by
mysteriously rare groups of Gurus, to be practised in the
unknown dark caves of the Himalayas, living altogether a
frightful life of unnatural privations. In the Geeta, the
word Yoga has been forever tamed and domesticated to be
with all of us, serving us faithfully at all times in our life.
By the term Yoga, in this last stanza, Krishna means the
"twelve techniques" which he has explained as the
subjective-Yajnas.
339

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The chapter concludes with a spirited call to Arjuna:
"ARISE, O BHARATA." In the context of the Geeta,
though the word may be rightly said to mean only a call to
Arjuna, it is a call to every seeker --- especially to this
country as a whole --- to get up and act well in the spirit of
Yajna, and thereby to gain more and more inner purity, so
that
through true meditation everyone of us can come to
experience and gain the Supreme Peace which is the final
fulfilment of evolution.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the fourth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF RENUNCIATION OF
ACTION IN KNOWLEDGE
Om Om Om Om Om

Chapter 5
Karma Sanyasa Yoga
The Yoga of Renunciation of Action
340

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjuna said: 1. Renunciation-of-actions, O Krishna, You praise
and again YOGA --- performance-of-actions. Tell me
conclusively that which is the better of the two.
It is evident that Arjuna has unconsciously walked out of
the neurotic confusions in his mind and has started taking
a lively intellectual interest in following the arguments of
his friend and beloved comrade. Action being in line with
his own nature, Arjuna very joyously and almost
instinctively accepts the Path of Action indicated by Lord
Krishna in the two previous chapters. Arjuna, however,
has not yet grown to be at complete rest with himself. To
him there seems to be a repeatedly jarring note in
Krishna's discourse, inasmuch as there is a constant
undertone, often very clear, in which Krishna insists that
renunciation of action is nobler and diviner than all YajnaACTIONS. Hence this enquiry.
Moreover, a patient of hysteria, even when he comes out
of it, cannot immediately discover in himself a complete
self-confidence. This is generally experienced by
everybody. When the dreamer wakes up after a horrible
dream, it takes some time for him to compose himself
again to sleep. In the same manner, Arjuna, after the
shattering experience of his emotional neurosis expressed
in the opening stanzas of Chapter II, has not yet found his
own balance to develop complete self-confidence and feel
capable of discriminating and understanding rightly the
learned discourses of the Divine Charioteer. The Pandava
Prince concludes that Krishna is giving him a free choice
341

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

between two independent ways of living --- self-less
Action and renunciation of Action. He, therefore, requests
Krishna to indicate to him decisively one definite path of
self-perfection by which he can positively achieve his
spiritual fulfilment. This chapter is spent in indicating to
the children of the Vedas that these two are not two
identical factors to be chosen from, nor are they a
complementary pair of equal yoke-fellows.
Renunciation-of-action and full participation-in-action are
two different exercises to be practised serially and not
simultaneously. This theme is elaborated in this chapter.
The Blessed Lord said: 2. Renunciation of action and YOGA of-action both lead to the highest bliss; but of the two , YOGA of-action is superior to the renunciation-of-action.
From the very type of the question with which Arjuna
approached Krishna in the opening verse of this chapter,
the Lord understood the abject state of ignorance that
Arjuna was in. According to Arjuna, Karma Yoga and
Karma-Samnyasa-Yoga were two distinct paths which
would lead the practitioner to two different goals in life.
Man is essentially prone to be inert. If left to themselves,
the majority of men would demand in life only food to eat,
with the least amount of exertion and plenty of idle hours.
From this unproductive inertia, the first stage of man's
growth is his being awakened to activity, and this is most
easily and efficiently done when the individual's desires
342

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

are whipped up. Thus, in the first stage of his evolution,
desire-prompted activity takes man out of his mental and
intellectual inertia to vigorous activity.
In the second stage of his growth, he becomes tired of the
desire-motivated activities, and feels energetic when
advised to spend at least a few hours in a noble field, with
a spirit of dedication and service. Such activities are
generally undertaken in the service of others, where the
individual works with the least ego. The secret of working
in this spirit of self-dedication has been already described
in an earlier chapter. When an individual in this second
stage of self-development works with his ego subdued, in
a spirit of devotion and dedication, he comes to exhaust
his vasanas. Thus unloaded, his mind and intellect develop
the wings of meditation and become capable of taking
longer flights into the subtle realms of joy and peace.
The third stage of development is accomplished through
meditation, which will be discussed in Chapter VI. To
summarise, we may say that the spiritual processes of selfevolution fall into three stages: (a) desire-prompted
activity, (b) self-less dedicated activity and (c) quiet
meditation. Of these, the first has already been described
in the earlier two chapters. The technique of meditation
will be described in the following chapter. Naturally
therefore, in this chapter, we are having a discussion on
how we can renounce the ego-motivated activities and
learn to take to selfless, dedicated activities.
343

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In this stanza Krishna explains that both activity and the
renunciation of activity can take the individual to the
highest goal. But he warns his disciple that of the two,
"participation-in-action" (karma) is any day superior to the
"renunciation-of-action" (karma-samnyasa). Here we must
understand that Krishna is not, in any sense of the term,
decrying renunciation as inferior to vigilant and vigorous
activity. To say so would be parading our ignorance, or at
least, a lack of understanding of what the Lord has said so
far, or the spirit in which he is continuing his discourses
hereafter. The Geeta is given out in the form of a
conversation between Krishna, the Immortal Teacher, and
a particular student facing a given problem and having
some definitely known mental weaknesses and
intellectual debilities, Arjuna. Essentially, here the
Pandava warrior is full of vasanas and for their exhaustion
he has to act in the battlefield. To those of us who are
psychologically in the state of Arjuna --- and almost all of
us are in that condition, suffering from the Arjuna-disease
--- the treatment is activity with the least conscious
selfishness. The advice given here that the "performanceof-action" is nobler than the "renunciation-of-action" is
therefore to be very carefully understood.
WHO SO?... IT IS SAID:
3. He should be known as a perpetual SAMNYASI who neither
hates nor desires; for, free from the pairs-of-opposites, O
Mighty-armed, he is easily set free from bondage.
344

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Why "participation-in-work" is said to be easier for a
beginner than "renunciation-of-action" is explained here.
While defining a samnyasi, Krishna's revolutionary
statement cleanses the idea of renunciation from all its
external embellishments. He gives more importance to the
internal mental condition than to the external uniform.
According to the Lord, he is a samnyasi who "neither likes
nor dislikes."
Likes and dislikes, success and failure, joy and sorrow and
such other pairs-of-opposites are the wheels on which the
mind rolls forward earning the experiences of life. Our
intellect can register a situation or a condition only with
reference to the comparative estimate of its opposite.
Thus, I can understand light only with reference to my
knowledge of darkness. Comparison is the only way of
understanding given to man. If there is no contrast for a
thing, we cannot gain knowledge of that thing.
If comparison and contrast are the methods 'of knowing'
for the mind-and-intellect instrument, then, to renounce
them is to renounce the vehicle. A car is a vehicle that
moves on the earth. It cannot be used in water. Thus, if I
am sailing on the ocean, I am certainly not moving in the
car, but I am using a boat which floats on water. In the
field of plurality where comparison and contrast are
possible, I can use the vehicle of the intellect-and-mind.
The stanza here states that he is a true samnyasi, who has
gone beyond the perception of contrast, which necessarily
345

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

means that he is one who has transcended the inner
instrument of mind-and-intellect.
This is no easy task; to free oneself from the pairs of
opposites is to be free from all the limitations of mortal
existence among finite objects. By thus defining a
samnyasi, Krishna is not trying to paint a dreary picture of
hopelessness for the seekers. He has in mind the growth
and development of Arjuna. The Pandava Prince was then
having, in his intellect, thick vasana-coatings of heroic
instincts and kingly impulses for action. This stanza is
given in order to persuade him to keep away from a hasty
dash into samnyasa.
4. Children, not the wise, speak of SANKHYA (Knowledge)
and YOGA (YOGA -of-action) as distinct; he who is truly
established even in one, obtains the fruits of both.
Two methods are indicated for turning an ordinary act
into a divine action of dedication and worship. It can
either be done "by the renunciation of the concept of
agency in every action" or by "a consistent refusal to get
dissipated by our unintelligent preoccupation with our
anxieties for the fruits of our action." The former is called
the Sankhya method and the latter is called simple Karma
Yoga.
The Sankhya technique is not available to everyone, since
the "renunciation of agency" is not easy unless the
346

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

practitioner is highly intellectual and has in himself a
capacity to see the collective universe in action. Only
when we see the total logic of things, can we really come
to feel the insignificance of our individual ego in all our
achievements in our successes.
Here, the Lord insists that only undeveloped, childish
minds can find contradiction between these two methods,
while wise men who have lived either of the paths will
vouchsafe for the equal effectiveness of both of them.
Whether we practise the renunciation of our agency-idea
or live a life of detachment from the fruits of our actions,
if, as seekers, we are consistently persevering in our
chosen path, we shall come to the Goal, which is the same
whether we follow the one or the other of the Paths.
HOW CAN A MAN OBTAIN THE RESULTS OF BOTH,
BY THE RIGHT OBSERVANCE OF ONLY ONE?... THE
ANSWER FOLLOWS:
5. That place which is reached by the SANKHYAS (JNANIS)
is also reached by the YOGINS (KARMA-YOGINS) . He
"sees, " who "sees " SANKHYA and YOGA as one.
Categorically, Lord Krishna insists herein that the goal
reached by the Sankhya-method is also readily reached by
the Karma-technique. He, who experiences this common
Goal of both paths, is the one who really understands the
Truth of the Vedas.
347

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here the word "seeing" (pashyati) is used in the scriptural
meaning of the term, and so does not indicate a mere
physical act of perception. In the Advaita philosophy,
Atman is not seen as anything other than the seer, but it is
the experience of the Seer himself BY the Seer himself. The
term "seeing" is used here only to confirm that the
experience of Reality could be as intimate and beyond all
doubts, as it would be, when we see any object with our
own eyes from very near.
In thus synthesising both Sankhya and Karma, it is not
meant that they together form an alloy; they both must be
practised serially. We can consider them as one and the
same inasmuch as Karma Yoga purifies the Intellect and
gives a greater poise for meditation (Sankhya) through
which alone is the final experience achieved. Thus a
combination of these two is possible serially and not
simultaneously. This is to be very carefully noted by all
sincere students.
HOW IS IT THAT THE AIM OF KARMA YOGA IS
SAMNYASA? --- LISTEN:
6. But renunciation, O mighty-armed, is hard to attain without
YOGA; the YOGA -harmonised man of (steady) contemplation
quickly goes to BRAHMAN.
The Lord, with all the emphasis at his command, is
declaring, once and for all, the final conclusions that were
348

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

arrived at by the Immortal Sages of yore regarding the
place of right-action in Self re-discovery. Without
performance of action, the renunciation of action is
impossible; without having a thing we cannot renounce it;
to renounce life and the world, because one has sadly been
thwarted in one's hopes and ambitions, is not
renunciation.
In this sense, the polishing of the mind is a process very
similar to that by which we clean metal-ware by using
metal-polish. The item that is darkened by time is purified
by applying some polishing chemical on its surface. The
polish is the solvent of the oxide that is covering the
brilliance of the vessel. After a time, when we remove the
coating of the "polish," we find that not only is the
chemical-polish removed but the black oxide also is
removed, threreby leaving the vessel bright and attractive.
Similarly, the mind can be purified only by the process of
treating it with right action. When thus treated, the mind
gets purified from its vasana-blemishes and with such a
purified mind alone can we, during the deeper meditation
hours, come to renounce all activities. Before this
preparation, if we try to renounce activities, we may
remain physically inactive, but mentally very active.
Extrovertedness of the mind is not conducive to the inner
polishing. In fact, extrovertedness is the very mud that
sullies the Godly-beauty and strength of the mind.

349

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This is the greatest discovery that Hindu Masters made in
the ancient days, in the technique of Self-development and
Self-growth.
While mental purity and meditative power cannot be
gained without performance of right action with the right
mental attitude, Sri Krishna gives a positive assurance
here that such a conducive mental quality can be created
by right actions undertaken by the seekers.
Yoga Yuktah --- One who is well established in the path of
selfless and unattached activities, soon develops the
qualities of poise and single-pointedness of mind. Karma
fulfils itself in making the Yogin fit for continuous and
fruitful meditation, and when such an individual who has
practised the Path of Karma diligently --- either through
the renunciation of his sense of agency or through
detachment from all his over-anxious preoccupations with
the fruits of his actions --- such a meditator (Muni) soon
attains the Supreme experience of the Self in himself.
No definite time-limit can be fixed for declaring when
exactly the Supreme experience will come to a meditator.
The indecision regarding the time-element in this promise
of certainty is very well brought out by the term used, 'Nachirena' --- not long afterwards, meaning 'ere-long.'
With this knowledge in mind, when we read the stanza, it
becomes very clear why earlier (V-2) the Lord, in his
opening verse in this discourse, insisted that for Arjuna
350

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

'performance-of-action' is superior to the 'renunciation-ofaction.'
WHEN THE DEVOTEE RESORTS TO KARMA YOGA AS
A MEANS OF ATTAINING RIGHT KNOWLEDGE:
7. He who is devoted to the Path-of-action, whose mind is quite
pure, who has conquered the self, who has subdued his senses,
who realises his Self as the Self in all beings, though acting, is
not tainted.
In the previous verse, it was said in a sweeping
generalisation, that he who pursues Karma Yoga along
with meditation, will ere-long reach the State of Perfection
in his own personal experience. Here, in this verse,
Krishna is trying to give us the logic of the state of inward
revolution that will take place when we make the
pilgrimage to the Infinite in us, from our own present
state of finitude and bondage.
With scientific thoroughness and logical precision, all the
different stages of development and change that take
place in an individual through Karma Yoga are
enumerated here. He who is well-established in Karma
Yoga, accomplishes purification of his intellect. Any
purification in the subtle body, means a better state of
quietude within. The lesser the agitations caused in us by
our desires or emotions, the purer are we considered by
Vedanta. Through action, when it is selfless and without
351

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

anxiety for the fruits, the practitioner exhausts his existing
vasanas. When the inner equipment is swept clean of its
desire-waves, it must, necessarily, become more and more
quiet and peaceful. When once the intellect is purified,
meaning, rendered immune to desire-disturbances, the
mind, which reflects the condition of the intellect, cannot
have any disturbances. The sentimental and emotional life
of one who has controlled the flood-gates of desires,
automatically becomes tame and equanimous.
When, through Karma Yoga, a man has gained inward
peace, both at his mental and at his intellectual levels, it
becomes child's play for him to deny and to restrain, to
control and to guide his sense organs and their never
ending appetites. A seeker (Yogi), who has thus controlled
his body, mind and intellect, is best fitted for the highest
meditation. In fact, all obstacles in meditation are nothing
other than the mile-stones of sensuous appetites,
emotional agitations and desire-problems. Once these
chains are snapped, he comes to the natural condition of
deep meditation, wherein the re-discovery of the Self must
be instantaneous and complete.
This realisation of the Self cannot be partial; it is not
realisation, if the meditator understands only himself to be
Divine. To the realised, Divinity or the Self is Infinite and
All-pervading. From the innermost sanctum of the Spirit
when he looks out, he realises nothing but Divinityeverywhere, in everyone, at all times. Therefore, the Lord
352

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

says, such a person "realises his own Self as the Self in all
beings."
When a wave has realised its true nature to be the ocean,
in its true ocean-vision, there cannot ever be any other
wave which is other than the ocean-essence.
When an individual, who has thus, through a total inner
revolution, come to realise his essential Infinite Divinity,
acts thereafter in his Atmic-consciousness, his actions
cannot leave any reactions upon him. Reactions of actions
can be claimed and arrogated only by the ego, and since,
after God-realisation there is no sense of ego left in the
God-man's bosom, his actions can thereafter leave no
impression upon him. Like a signature upon running
waters, nothing can ever stay in him to leave behind a
vasana.
On the whole, the theory of Karma Yoga propounded by
Krishna has been consistently kept up by the Lord in all
his declarations; but often it is conceived beautifully in the
suggestive fragrance of his words. In the stanza under
discussion also, it has been amply brought out that egocentric activities, motivated by desires, alone can create
vasana-granulations upon the intellect, and consequently
dim its discriminative awareness to know, to feel and to
experience the Eternal Divinity, which is the essential
nature of man as a spiritual being.

353

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IN THIS CONSCIOUSNESS OF UNIVERSALITY AND
SUPREME SENSE OF DIVINITY, WHEN A SAGE ACTS,
WHAT EXACTLY WILL BE HIS ATTITUDE IN LIFE?
8. "I do nothing at all, " thus would the harmonised knower of
Truth think seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, going,
sleeping, breathing,
9. Speaking, letting go, seizing, opening and closing the eyes --convinced that the senses move among the sense-objects.
Even such a perfect one is found to live, not sitting like a
stone-statue, but acting diligently, like any one else in the
world. A list of these common and natural activities is
indicated in these two stanzas: "SEEING, HEARING,
TOUCHING, SMELLING, EATING, GOING, SLEEPING,
BREATHING, SPEAKING, DROPPING, HOLDING,
WINKING," etc. In all these unavoidable activities of life,
it is explained here, a Sage or a prophet, living in the
world, will not have any egoistic vanity.
In deep-sleep we breathe, but we are not conscious of it at
all, since at that time, the ego in us is not functioning.
Similarly, when the ego has ended, all these activities take
place instinctively. Even while carrying on these activities,
the Seer has a constant awareness that "I DO NOTHING
AT ALL." This does not mean that a Perfect Master is an
irredeemable sleep-walker! The essential difference
354

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

between the two is, that the sleep-walker is unconscious,
while a Sage is ever conscious of the Consciousness.
That this attitude of total surrender of the sense of agency
can come only to a Perfect Master is very clearly indicated
here by the two terms "centered" or "steadfast," Yuktah
meaning, "centered in the Self." This Self-centered-ness
can be in two grades of intensity: one, indicating the selfcenteredness of a seeker who, through study, reflection
and meditation, tries to remain intellectually centered in
the Self; and another, the self-absorption of one who, after
the final realisation of the Self in himself, comes to live
vitally, at every moment, the experience of the Self
(Atmavit).
In order that we may come to withdraw ourselves from
the wrong conceptions of our own agency, we must have
a substitute 'Knowledge-bit' in ourselves, which will help
us in living the new experience. When I am ignorant of my
waking state-personality, I become victimised by my own
dream identity and this dream-identification ends only
when I re discover my real waking-state-personality and
come to live in the unbroken awareness of "I am the
waker." Similarly, in order to maintain in myself the
attitude "I am not the actor," it is necessary that I must
have another positive assumption to replace this negative
false belief. This is indicated in the last line of the stanza
that a man of perfection, living in unison with the Truth, is
ever an observer of the varieties of his own actions that are
355

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

executed by the various layers of matter in him among the
world-of-objects.
Just as the ocean, were it conscious, could watch and
observe its own waves rising and setting upon its own
surface, declaring its own glory, so too, from the infinite
depths of his own personality, the Master watches the
actions performed by the various layers of matter in him.
As I am typing these lines, I can watch my own fingers
typing and the more detached I grow, the more
entertaining becomes the play of the fingers on the
keyboard. Similarly, a Sage can, once having entered the
innermost sanctum of his Self, ever afterwards watch the
inert matter entities in him getting thrilled with activity in
a thousand channels of independent pre-occupations. He
is unconcerned; he is unperturbed; from the bottomless
depths of his own Being he watches on, in perfect
detachment born of his realised knowledge, and he is ever
confident that "I DO NOTHING AT ALL." BUT, WHAT
SHOULD BE THE ATTITUDE OF A MAN WHO IS NOT
A TRUTH-KNOWER AND IS ENGAGED IN ACTION?
10. He who does actions, offering them to BRAHMAN,
abandoning attachment, is not tainted by sin, just as a lotus leaf
remains unaffected by the water on it.
What has been said in the previous stanza may be true for
those rare few who have realised the Truth and are
revelling in God-consciousness. But the strange life-of356

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

detachment by which we can renounce completely the
sense of agency, is not available for all of us. We are but
aspirants and seekers of this Perfection. The way in which
we can train ourselves to renounce the sense of agency
will be the problem of all true students of the Geeta who
want to LIVE the Geeta rather than talk about its ideas. In
this stanza we have a prescription by which every one of
us can come to live the life of intelligent detachment in
life.
RESIGNING TO BRAHMAN --- Total detachment is
impossible for the human mind and that is exactly what
spiritual seekers often fail to understand. As long as there
is a mind it has to attach itself to something. Therefore,
detachment from the false can be successful only when we
attach ourselves to the Real. This psychological fact is
scientifically enunciated in this stanza, wherein Lord
Krishna advises the seeker to surrender all his
attachments to Brahman and continue striving on. To
remember constantly an ideal, is to become more and
more attuned to the perfections of the ideal. In order that
we may surrender all our sense of agency in our actions to
Brahman, we have to remember this concept of Truth as
often as we now remember our limited ego. When the
frequency of our thoughts upon the Lord becomes as high
as the frequency with which we now remember the egoidea, we shall come to realise the Brahman-ideal as
intimately as we now know our own ego.

357

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In short, to-day we are "EGO-REALISED SOULS"; the
Geeta's call to man is to become "SOUL-REALISED
EGOS."
Once our Real Nature is realised, the actions of the body,
mind and intellect can no more leave any impression
upon the Self. Merits and demerits belong to the ego and
never to the Atman. The imperfections of my reflections in
a mirror cannot be my imperfections, but can only be
because of the distortions in the reflecting surface. The
reflection may look shortened or lengthened according to
the type of the mirror into which I am looking. Similarly,
the ego comes to suffer the perfect and the imperfect
reactions of its own actions.
Having thus realised the Self, to remain in the matterenvelopments and their world of objects, is to remain ever
perfectly detached "as the lotus leaf in the water." Though
the lotus leaf exists ONLY in water, draws its nourishment
from the very water and dies away in the same water, yet,
during its life as a leaf, it does not allow itself to be
moistened by water. Similarly, a saint in the world, as a
matter-entity, draws the nourishment for his individual
existence from the world of objects but ever remains
perfectly detached from his own merits and demerits,
from his own concepts of beauty and ugliness, from his
own likes and dislikes in the outside world.
Of the two methods by which ordinary Karma can be
transformed into Karma-Yoga, we have here the technique
358

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of renouncing one's sense of agency in one's actions
exhaustively described. This is no strange theory; nor is it
a unique doctrine. At every moment, all around the world,
we see this enacted in a thousand ways. A doctor's
attachment to his wife makes him incapacitated to
perform an operation on her, although the same doctor,
on the same day, may perform the same operation upon
another patient, towards whom he has no self-deluding
attachment.
If man were to act as a representative of the Infinite and
the Eternal, he would discover in himself mightier
possibilities and greater effectiveness, which are all
wasted and squandered to-day by his mis-conception of
the finite-ego as himself.
BECAUSE OF THIS:
11. YOGIS, having abandoned attachment, perform actions
merely by the body, mind, intellect and senses, for the
purification of the self (ego) .
A Karma-YogiN's attempt is to keep himself within himself
--- as a detached but interested observer of all that is
happening around and within himself. When he thus
observes himself, from within himself, as a worker in any
given field, it becomes easy for him to see that all actions
belong to the above-mentioned instruments-of-action and
not to the detached OBSERVER in him. Here, however, he
359

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

must realise that the OBSERVER in himself is not the
Truth, but this OBSERVER is "Truth standing on the open
balcony of the intellect." Even while thus observing
ourselves in action, we are ever conscious of the very
OBSERVER in ourselves. "The Consciousness that
illumines the very OBSERVER, is the Spiritual-centre, the
Self," is the declaration of all Upanishads.
If thus, the Spiritual-centre itself is something beyond the
"observer," why should a Karma-Yogin practise this
technique of self-observation called in our Shastras the
"witness-attitude" (Sakshibhava)? This is answered at the
end of the verse when Bhagavan says, "for the purification
of the ego." By such a practice, the seeker will be entering
into the field of activity and pursuing the work without
the self-arrogating ego, thereby rendering himself
available for an easy and effective purgation of the
existing vasana-impurities. To the degree these are
removed, to that degree the inner equipments become
clearer and steadier, rendering the reflection of the DivineConsciousness in them more and more vivid.
ALSO BECAUSE OF THE FOLLOWING FACT THE
KARMA-YOGINS
PRACTISE
WORK
WITH
DETACHMENT:
12. The united one (the well-poised or the harmonised) , having
abandoned the fruit of action, attains Eternal Peace; the non360

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

united (the unsteady or the unbalanced) , impelled by desire and
attached to the fruit, is bound.
Through right actions, undertaken without any selfdissipating anxiety for the fruits of those actions, a KarmaYogin can reach an indescribable peace, arising out of the
sense of steadfastness within him. Peace is not a product
manufactured by any economic condition or cooked up by
any political set-up. It cannot be ordered by constitutionmaking bodies or international assemblies. It is the mental
condition in the bosom of the individual when his inner
world is not agitated by any mad storms of disturbing
thoughts. Peace is an unbroken sense of joy and it is the
fragrance of an integrated personality. That, this can be
brought about through selfless actions undertaken in a
spirit of Yajna, is the revolutionising theory given here.
When the worker is "ESTABLISHED IN HIS
RENUNCIATION OF THE EGOISTIC SENSE OF
AGENCY" and when he has "RENOUNCED HIS EGOCENTRIC DESIRES FOR THE FRUITS OF HIS
ACTIONS," he soon becomes integrated and comes to
experience the peace of steadfastness.
Not satisfied by this positive assertion, the Lord is reemphasising this very same philosophical truth in the
language of negation. He says that when one is not
ESTABLISHED (Ayuktah) in the renunciation of "agency,"
and because of his desires, gets himself tied down to some
expected results of his actions, he gets bound and
persecuted by the reactions of his own actions. Some
361

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

medicines, which, in small doses can give a complete cure,
can also spell death in larger doses --- for example, the
sleeping tablets. An instrument by which we can defend
ourselves can itself be the instrument for our own suicide.
In the same way, when we work in the outer field
unintelligently, instead of gaining a greater glow of
satisfaction and joy within, we will get ourselves more
and more bound, and hurled down into bottomless
darkness. The cause for this has been beautifully
explained by Sri Krishna. Due to desires for specific fruits,
we are mentally attached to those wished-for patterns to
be fulfilled in future. This is compelling life to patternise
itself to our will at a future moment; if a frog were to
imitate a bull and grow to the bull's size, it would end in a
tragedy; a mortal finite mind ordering a pattern for a
future period of time, is in no way better equipped than
the frog that tries to expand to the size of a bull.
BUT AS TO THE MAN WHO SEES THE SUPREME
BEING:
13. Mentally renouncing all actions and fully self-controlled,
the "embodied" one rests happily in the nine-gate city, neither
acting nor causing others (body and senses) to act.
Samnyasa is not a mere physical escapism but a mental
withdrawal from things that are unintelligent and
thoughtless. It is a mental attitude and not an external
362

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

symbol. Therefore, he who is a self-controlled individual
and who has brought all his sense-appetities under perfect
control, and renounced all his ego-centric and desireprompted actions, comes to experience and live in a
nameless joy, contentment and peace which well up from
the very depths within him. He thus remains contented
and happy, in the "City-of-nine-gates."
This is a famous metaphor used in the Upanishads, to
indicate the physical body of the seeker. The body is
considered a fortress city, having nine main gates, which
are the nine apertures in the physical structure, seven of
them on the face (two eyes, two nostrils, two ears and one
mouth) and the two apertures on the trunk, the genital
organ and the excretory organ. Without these nine holes
or at least a majority of them, life within the body is
impossible. Just as the King, remaining in the fortress,
rules over his kingdom through his ministers, giving them
the encouragement, strength and sanction by his mere
presence, so too, the Atman, within the physical structure,
though Itself doing nothing, by Its mere presence, vitalises
the various instruments of cognition and action, within
and without and governs the "life" in them all.
This famous metaphor is used here by Sri Krishna, and he
says that a self-controlled man lives within the physical
body, a nameless joy of pure Divine life, ever watching
over the activities of the matter-envelopments around
him!! Such an individual, ever identifying with the Self,
observes-on, unaffected, unattached and without
363

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

agitations, all the thrilled activities in the layers of matter,
but "neither does he act nor does he cause others to act."
MOREOVER:
14. Neither agency nor actions does the Lord create for the
world, nor union with the fruits of actions. But it is Nature that
acts.
In the ritualistic portion of the Vedas, God is the Supreme
Intelligence, ever dynamic and potent, who observes and
watches over all our actions, and who, with perfect justice
dispenses to each his reward for all his actions. Here,
however, the Lord, the Creator, is described not so much
as what HE IS as what HIS RELATIONSHIP with the
Universe is.
The Supreme Self neither creates any sense of agency nor
does It sanction any action. The Supreme has no such
function as marrying every action to its correct fruits. In
this very assertion we can find how far the ordinary
commentators, who jump to the conclusion that this
passage is a description of the Vedic God-principle (Karmaphala-data), are in the wrong. Any close student of the
Geeta can clearly see that there is an attempt on the part of
Krishna to indicate to Arjuna the function and nature of
the Self and Its relationship with the three bodies: the
physical, the mental and the causal.
364

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

If the Reality, the Self, has nothing to do with the abovementioned agency or their fruits, our life which is nothing
without them, must have no relationship at all with the
Self. And yet, where the Self is not there, existence and
activities are not possible. Therefore, there must be some
relationship between the Self and the non-Self and here
this strange "CONTACTLESS-CONTACT" is being
explained.
It is very well-known that my nose is a permanent fixture
on my face. It has neither a voluntary nor an involuntary
movement. And yet, the other day, when I was looking
into a basin of water, I saw my nose and ears moving
rhythmically sideways as though upon well-oiled-hinges!
Even when I saw it, I knew that my nose was not moving;
but, all the same, I saw what I saw. Because my reflection
in the water depended entirely upon the reflecting
surface, it gathered unto itself its abnormalities from the
vagaries of the reflecting medium. The Self or the Atman
has neither activities nor an agency, and yet when in this
life I function through the equipments that are natural to
me, the conditioned Self, the ego, gathers unto itself these
peculiarities of agency, actions and anxieties for their
fruits.
Electricity in itself is static energy. But when it is
generated, stored and sent out through the distribution
system, and when it reaches the terminals in my room and
I plug on to it the various equipments, the same energy
becomes dynamic. When the Self, pregnant with all
365

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

potentialities, functions through the matter-conditionings,
It assumes to Itself the ego-centric attitudes of agency,
action, fruits, etc.
The ENJOYER of the fruits and the PERFORMER of
actions in us is the ego and not the Atman. I do not shake
or shiver but my reflection can be shaken when the
reflecting medium is disturbed. The Atman becomes the
performer, etc., only when It gets conditioned by
"Swabhava" --- Nature, or "Maya," "THE DIVINE Maya
MADE UP OF THE THREE gunas," as the Lord Himself
calls it.
IN REALITY HOWEVER, THE LORD IN HIS ABSOLUTE
NATURE IS EVER-UNINVOLVED:
15. The Lord takes neither the demerit not even the merit of any;
knowledge is enveloped by ignorance, thereby beings are
deluded.
The Supreme, who is All-pervading (Vibhuh), contrary to
all our Pauranic concepts of stock-taking gods and deities,
is declared here as not taking any note of the merit or the
demerit of the living creatures. It is such passages that
shock the story-reading devotee-class, and therefore, they
generally ignore the Geeta and read instead the glories of
Krishna. The concept that God sits just over the clouds,
peeping down and observing every sin and merit of all the
people all over the world, and that He keeps a perfect
366

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

account of all these so that on the Day of Judgement each
one will approach the Father who will pass the judgement
--- is a concept which can appeal only to simple folk in
whom the intellect is the least developed faculty!
The Eternal-Principle underlying life's activities cannot be
conceived of as taking any active note or interest in the
created or in the finite. From the Infinite standpoint, the
finite exists not. It is only when the Supreme functions
through Self-forgetfulness that It comes to see Itself split
up into the concepts of agent, action, fruit, etc. Sunlight
passing through a plane glass, in spite of the medium
through which it has passed, emerges in its pure nature, if
the glass be clean, flawless and colourless. If, on the other
hand, a pencil of light were to pass through a glass prism,
we all know that it would emerge in its seven component
colours, constituting the spectrum. Similarly, the Self
passing through Knowledge (Jnana) emerges as Self,
which is the One-without-a-second, All-pervading, Allperfect. But the same Self, when It passes through
ignorance --- meaning, the body, mind and intellect --- It
splits up into the endless world of plurality.
The relationship between Knowledge and Ignorance is
very beautifully explained here. Ignorance cannot be
Knowledge, nor can Knowledge be a part of Ignorance.
Where Ignorance is, there Knowledge cannot be. Where
Knowledge has come, Ignorance must depart. But here,
we are told "KNOWLEDGE IS ENVELOPED BY
IGNORANCE," just as a solitary light in a dark jungle,
367

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

seen from a distance can be described as a light encaged in
darkness. This relationship and the method of stripping
Knowledge naked, is more elaborately indicated in the
following stanza.
THE UNVEILING OF TRUTH IS A PROCESS OF THE
REMOVAL OF IGNORANCE AND NOT A CREATION
OF KNOWLEDGE, AND THEREFORE, IT IS ONLY AN
ACT OF RE-DISCOVERY AND NOT A CREATIVE
ACHIEVEMENT. THIS IS AMPLY BROUGHT OUT BY
VYASA'S WORDS IN THE FOLLOWING:
16. But to those whose ignorance is destroyed by the Knowledge
of the Self, like the sun, to them Knowledge reveals the Supreme
(BRAHMAN) .
In the case of finite mortals, sighing and sobbing in
ignorance, the Self is screened off from them by lifeless
walls of nescience (Avidya). The man of realisation is one
in whom Knowledge has lifted this veil of ignorance.
Darkness is removed by Light not by degrees but
instantaneously --- however old the darkness may be and
however thick its density. Similarly, in one who has
Knowledge (Jnana) of the Self, the beginningless ignorance
is lifted and within a lightning flash, his ignorance ends.
Ignorance creates the ego-centric concept and the ego
thrives in the body, mind and intellect. With the end of
ignorance, the ego too ends.
368

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

At this stage of Vedantic discussion, the dualists (Dwaitins)
generally feel like collapsing in sheer despair. they fail to
understand how the Self can be experienced when the
experiencer, the ego and the instruments of experiencing,
which are familiar to them in perception, feeling and
thinking, have all ended. Any intelligent student must
surely entertain this doubt. Foreseeing this possibility,
Krishna is here trying to explain how, when the ego has
ended, Knowledge becomes self-evident.
This explanation cannot be brought so easily within the
comprehension of a thinking intellect but by the example,
which the Lord gives in the second line: "LIKE THE SUN."
It is the experience of all of us that, during the monsoon,
we do not see the sun for days together, and we, in our
hasty conclusions, cry out "the sun has been covered by
clouds."
When we reconsider this statement, it is not very difficult
for us to understand that the sun cannot be covered by a
tiny bit of a cloud. Also, the region of the cloud is far
removed from the centre of the Universe where the sun, in
its infinite glory, revels as the one-without-a-second. The
minute humans observing from the surface of the globe
with their tiny eyes, experience that the glorious orb of the
sun is being veiled because of a wisp of cloud. Even a
mighty mountain can be veiled from our vision if we put
our tiny little finger very near our eyes!

369

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Similarly, the ego (Jiva) looking up to the Atman finds that
ignorance is enveloping the Infinite. This ignorance is not
in Truth, just as the clouds are never in the sun. The finite
ignorance is certainly a limited factor compared with the
infinitude of Reality. And yet, the mist of Selfforgetfulness that hangs in the chambers of the heart gives
the ego the false notion that the Spiritual Reality is
enveloped by ignorance. When this ignorance is removed,
the Self becomes manifest, just as when the cloud has
moved away, the sun becomes manifest.
To see the sun, we need no other light; to experience the
Self we need no other experience. The Self IS Awareness.
It is Consciousness. To become conscious of
Consciousness, we need no separate consciousness; to
know knowledge we need no knowledge other than
Knowledge; Knowledge is the very faculty of knowing.
Similarly, when the ego rediscovers the Self, it becomes
the Self.
When a dreamer has ended his dream-career along with
his dream, he rediscovers himself to be the waker. The
waker is never known or understood or recognised as an
object by the dreamer. The dreamer himself transcends the
dream-world and enters the realm of waking, wherein he
knows himself to be the waker. In the same fashion, the
deluded ego, when it walks out of ignorance and enters
the realm of pure consciousness, it BECOMES the
Consciousness which is the Atman. This relationship
between the ego and the Atman, and the technique of
370

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

rediscovery of the Atman by the ego, are beautifully
described by this metaphor which is full of deep
significance --- for those who know how to chew upon it
in independent thinking. THE SAGE, WHOSE
INTELLECT IS ABSORBED IN TRUTH, WILL HAVE NO
MORE BIRTHS.
17. Intellect absorbed in that, their Self being That, established
in that, with That for their Supreme Goal, they go whence there
is no return, their sins dispelled by Knowledge.
With a deep study of the Reality, the seeker in all his
various personal identities, thereafter comes to live in
unison with that understanding of the Divinity. His
intellect gets, as it were, absorbed in That Knowledge and
his mind cannot but sing the song of Godliness through
everyone of its emotions. He becomes ever intent upon the
Infinite Bliss which he has come to recognise as the
essence in him. to such an individual the very Goal is
nothing but the Self, which he has understood as
illimitable and unlimited.
An individual who has thus educated himself upon the
World-of-Truth within himself, shall thereafter, have no
reason or chance to get caught up again in this world of
likes and dislikes. This is the result of full
PARTICIPATION in the studies. The next stage is to live
up to what is understood from the studies; the active
371

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

INVOLVEMENT in spiritual life. Then comes complete
COMMITMENT.
How can we say that the ego will not rise again in such a
man's bosom? The reason is indicated here, when Krishna
qualifies such men as "THOSE WHOSE IMPURITIES
HAVE BEEN SHAKEN OFF BY KNOWLEDGE." The
impurities mentioned here are the vasanas which are the
very materials with which the ego is conjured up. These
vasanas together constitute what we philosophically call:
"the ignorance of Spiritual Divinity." The antidote for
ignorance is Knowledge. Thus, when, with the rise of the
Knowledge of Spiritual Bliss, the dreary darkness of
ignorance ends, the ego too comes to a total extinction
from which it cannot re-start its career. Without a cause no
effect is ever possible. In short, in this stanza, we are
meeting the most optimistic philosophy in the world,
declaring courageously that, Self-Realisation is the final
experience in the pilgrimage of evolution, and that, in it,
the evolver in us shall come to fulfil himself. Godrealisation is the last stage of growth, and thereafter, to be
the 'Supreme' is the goal of all evolutionary struggles, to
achieve which, the ego, in its self-evolution, roamed about
so long in the field of its own self-created world-offinitude and imperfections!
HOW DO THOSE WISE MEN, WHOSE IGNORANCE OF
THE SELF HAS BEEN REMOVED BY KNOWLEDGE,
SEE TRUTH? --- IT IS SAID:
372

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

18. Sages look with an equal eye upon a BRAHMANA
endowed with learning and humility, on a cow, on an elephant,
and even on a dog and an outcaste.
The wise cannot but see and recognise the same presence
of Divinity everywhere. The ocean has no difference in
feeling for different waves. Gold cannot recognise itself as
different in different pieces of ornaments. From the standpoint of mud, all mud pots are the same. Similarly, an
egoless man, having recognised himself to be God, can
find in no way, any distinction in the outer world of
names and forms. The distinctions generally recognised,
are all the distinctions of the containers. Man to man, there
may be differences in form, shape and colour of the body,
or the nature of the mind or the subtlety of the intellect.
But as far as Life is concerned, It is the same everywhere,
at all times.
Therefore, it is said in this stanza, that the Self-realised
cast an equal eye on a Brahmana endowed with
scholarship coupled with humility, on a cow, on an
elephant, on a dog or on a pariah. Everywhere he realises
the presence of the same Truth, whatever be the container.
Equal vision is the hall-mark of Realisation. The perfected
cannot make distinctions based upon likes and dislikes. In
and through all forms and situations, he sees the
expressions of the same dynamic Truth which he
experiences as his own Self.
373

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Shankara, in his commentary on this stanza, quotes
Goutama-Smriti which says that it is not only sinful if we
do not respect those whom we must respect, but it is
equally sinful if we respect those whom we should not
respect. Thus, from the standpoint of this Smriti's
declaration, to respect the dog as much as the Brahmana or
to respect a Brahmana only as much as we generally
respect a dog, would both be sin indeed. In order to show
that it is not so, the following stanza is given.
THESE ARE NOT SINFUL, FOR:
19. Even here (in this world) , birth (everything) is overcome by
those whose minds rest in equality; BRAHMAN is spotless
indeed and equal; therefore they are established in BRAHMAN.
In this stanza, almost a whole Scripture is indicated. In the
context of the development of the theme, Lord Krishna
had to show, first of all, that the Perfection, described in
the previous few stanzas, is not a Godly idealism to be
experienced after death, in a specialised world beyond the
clouds, called the Heavens. Pauranic Hinduism and all
Semitic religions promise a Heaven as the glorious goal of
existence and spiritual effort. However, to an intelligent
man; this promise is nothing more than a charming
hallucination, and not a positive gain. Such a vague goal
cannot be sufficiently encouraging to coax out of an
intelligent man all his enthusiasm and sincerity.
374

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Contrary to this vague hope, here in Vedanta, the naked
truth is declared when Krishna repeats what the Rishis
had earlier asserted a thousand times. It is expressly
mentioned that the relative existence as a limited egocentre can be ended, and the imperfect individual can
realize himself to be the Infinite Godhead. This goal can be
reached not only at a post-mortem stage, but in this very
same life, here in this very body, among these very same
worldly objects, and one can live in the Consciousness of
God, evolving oneself from the immaturities of the
deluded ego-sense.
Who is capable of gaining this ascendency in himself?
What is the secret method by which this consummate selfredemption can be effectively fulfilled? The assertion that
man can reach this goal in this very life is made in the first
line by a detailed description of how it can be executed
and practically lived. It is said that the one, "WHOSE
MIND RESTS IN EVENNESS," gains the Divine
tranquillity of a God-man.
Patanjali Yoga-Sutra also explains the same fact in different
words. Where the thought-flow, which creates unequal
and spasmodic mental fluctuations, is arrested, there the
mind ends. Where the mind ends, it being the equipment
through which Life expresses as a limited ego, this sense
of separative existence also ends. When the ego has ended,
the egocentric thraldom of samsara also ends. The ego,
thus undressed of its samsaric sorrows, rediscovers itself to
be nothing other than the Self Itself. Unless one comes to
375

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

this mental equipoise, one is not capable of experiencing
the Samattwam of the Sama-darshin described in the above
stanza.
"Such an individual who has conquered his mind and has
come to live in perfect equanimity, in all conditions of life,
in all its relationships, "Krishna vehemently asserts, "HE
INDEED RESTS IN Brahman." This may look rather
illogical at the first reading, and therefore, as an
explanation in a parenthetical clause, Krishna gives his
reasons for such a daring assertion; he says, "SINCE
Brahman IS EVEN AND EVER-PERFECT."
Brahman is homogeneous and All-pervading. Everything
happens IN IT, and yet, nothing happens TO IT. Thus, the
Truth remains changeless and ever the same, just as the
river-bed ever remains motionless, although the units of
water flowing in it are ever-changing. It is a quality of the
substratum to remain changeless; all manifestations and
super-impositions, by their very nature, must change. An
individual, in his identifications with his body, etc.,
becomes a changing factor, a victim of every passing
disturbance; but the substratum, the Self, ever remains the
same.
An individual who has discovered for himself a sufficient
amount of tranquillity in which nothing dares disturb him
anymore, is certainly one who has plumbed the depths
and touched the bottom. A reed on the waves will be
tossed up and down by the waves, but a light-house built
376

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

upon firm rocks always remains upright and changeless,
allowing even the stormy waves to exhaust their anger at
its feet. Krishna's argument is thus logically sound when
he declares that a mortal among us, who can maintain his
equanimity under all conditions as explained in the
foregoing stanzas, is indeed one who has contacted the
Divine and the Eternal in Himself, "HE INDEED RESTS
IN Brahman."
BECAUSE BRAHMAN, THE SELF, IS HOMOGENEOUS
AND WITHOUT BLEMISHES, THEREFORE:
20. Resting in BRAHMAN, with steady intellect and
undeluded, the knower of BRAHMAN neither rejoices on
obtaining what is pleasant, nor grieves on obtaining what is
unpleasant.
Just as an excellent artist working at his masterpiece on his
canvas would again and again approach his piece of art to
add more details with finer strokes to his picture, and
would again and again retreat from the canvas to gaze at
his art from a distance, so too here, the Lord is creating
with his chosen words the picture of the mental life of a
man of equipoise and perfection upon the canvas of man's
heart. He dedicates many stanzas in order that the picture
may clearly and vividly come into the recognition and
appreciation of even the ordinary, casual student. Here is
yet another stanza offered with a burning enthusiasm and
almost missionary zeal, so that Arjuna, the confused, may
377

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

come to gain a vivid picture of the Man-of-Perfection, who
is not a mere impotent stone idol on the Ganges-banks,
but a veritable dynamic factor that moulds and influences
his generation of fellow beings.
Ordinarily, man gets excited or becomes despondent, not
because of the happenings in the outer world, but because
of his individual contact with them. If any man dies in the
city, it is not tragedy to me, but when my father dies, it is
my calamity. This clearly proves that the death of a man,
in itself, cannot bring any disturbance to my mind, unless
my mind had already projected itself on its relationship to
the individual who has died. The Man-of-Perfection who
has won over his mind and has come to experience the
Infinite Self, can no more, therefore, "FEEL ANY JOY ON
RECEIVING WHAT IS PLEASANT, NOR GRIEVE ON
RECEIVING WHAT IS UNPLEASANT." It does not mean
that a Man-of-Perfection is a wooden doll or an iron
statue, incapable of reacting to the external things whether
they be pleasant or unpleasant. It only means that a man
of true inward culture, discovers in himself, in his own
wisdom, a balance and an equipoise, which cannot be
shattered very easily.
When a man of such super-human mental steadfastness is
analysed, we can easily discover that no condition or
circumstances in the outer world can ever gain an entry
into the inner precincts of his personality. His intellect
becomes steady, since it is not poisoned with the usual
ego-centric misconceptions. It is, in fact, very interesting to
378

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

note how the ideas arranged in this stanza, in their very
sequence, explain a wondrous truth. One who is
unaffected by the presence of things, good or bad, is the
one whose "INTELLECT IS STEADY," and the one whose
INTELLECT IS STEADY, is the "ONE IN WHOM ALL
DELUSIONS HAVE ENDED." A steady intellect from
which all delusions have dropped becomes the instrument
for "KNOWING Brahman" --- and the "one who knows
Brahman becomes Brahman," and therefore, comes to live
"ESTABLISHED IN THE BRAHMIC CONSCIOUSNESS
OF INFINITE BEATITUDE," a living God-man walking
upon the earth that is Olympus to him.
MOREOVER, RESTING IN BRAHMAN:
21. With the self unattached to external contacts, he finds
happiness in the Self; with the self engaged in the meditation of
BRAHMAN, he attains endless happiness.
The foregoing stanza might give to an unprepared
student, the idea that spiritual life is a static existence
where a baked, stony heart, vainly comes in contact with
the heart-throbs in the world of objects, and feels for itself
nothing but a monotonous equanimity. In that case a
majority of us, without much discussion, can take our hats
off and say "goodbye" to all spirituality immediately. For,
who can deny the fact that the world, as it is constituted
to-day, in spite of its imperfections, when it comes in
contact with our own inner world, however maladjusted
379

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the inner world may be, can and does give minute flashes
of joy? Why should I deny myself the brilliant flashes of
momentary joys in exchange for a steady stone-like,
impregnable monotony, call it equilibrium or equanimity,
peace or God-hood? By changing the name, the thing itself
is never changed!
This doubt is not a mere exaggeration. This is often heard
in the halls of Vedanta from the lips of all sincere seekers.
Any sensible seeker entering the halls of spiritual study
with his intellect bright and clear, should come to doubt
its efficacy and utility. No teacher can afford to ignore
answering these questions and re-assuring the students;
Krishna, as a professional teacher, is doing the same in
this stanza.
THE ONE WHO HAS GAINED COMPLETE
DETACHMENT FROM THE EXTERNAL OBJECTS,
REALISES THE BLISS THAT IS THE NATURE OF THE
SELF. Though the process of self-development is
essentially a process of detachment, this technique of
negation does not take us to an empty and purposeless
zero, but when we have negated all that is false, we come
to experience and live a total positivity. When the dreamer
has renounced all his contacts with the dream-world and
thrown away his dream personality, he does not become a
non-entity, but he re-discovers himself to be the more
vital, the more effective personality, the waker.

380

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Similarly, whenever contacts with the external world
through the media of the body, the mind and the intellect
are clipped off clean, we awaken in the meadows of Godconsciousness and come to live the joy that is the eternal
nature of the Self. A seeker having thus redeemed his own
mind and intellect from their preoccupations with the
external world, at least during his meditation, when he
comes to keep his HEART DEVOTED TO THE
MEDITATION OF Brahman, attains imperishable
happiness. Here the term "heart" is to be understood as a
collective name for the inner instruments of knowing and
experiencing.
FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS ALSO HE SHOULD
WITHDRAW THE SENSES FROM THE EXTERNAL
WORLD-OF-OBJECTS:
22. The enjoyments that are born of contacts are only generators
of pain, for they have a beginning and an end. O son of Kunti,
the wise do not rejoice in them.
We, as seekers, try to detach ourselves from the external
contacts in order to enjoy the Infinite Bliss which is the
nature of the Self. Even an average intelligent man, if he
cares to investigate his own experiences with the outer
world, will discover, all by himself, that joy-hunting
among the finite objects is no profitable preoccupation.
The law of diminishing utility works in all our experiences
and the very thing that gave a certain unit of joy in the
381

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

beginning, itself soon becomes a stinking putrefying pit of
sorrow. The experiences with the first laddu and the
twenty-fifth laddu when you are not hungry, are a
practical demonstration of this fundamental truth, that
sensuous joys are doomed to pain from the very
beginning.
A sense-object can only be as beautiful and joyous as a
leprous whore, painted, powdered and dressed up to
smile at strangers in the dark alleys of a dilapidated
commercial town. Lord Krishna beautifully brings out this
idea, when he points out to Arjuna, how sense-objects and
their joys, being finite in nature, do not enchant a wise
man.
Man, if he is wise, is satisfied only with the Infinite. Finite
things can only torture us with hopes of getting a more
satisfactory joy, and whip us along the path of
sensuousness making us pant in sheer exhaustion,
hunting for a complete satisfaction --- from ditch to ditch,
from gutter to gutter. The chaster, the fuller, the Diviner
joy, is gained only
when we come to experience the Self as explained in the
previous stanza.
AND THERE IS ALSO A WICKED THING, AN ENEMY
ON THE PATH OF BLISS, A MOST DIFFICULT THING
TO DEAL WITH, THE SOURCE OF ALL EVIL, VERY
DIFFICULT TO WARD OFF. MIGHTY EFFORTS
382

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SHOULD BE MADE, SAYS THE LORD, TO REPEL THIS
ENEMY:
23. He who is able, while still here (in this world) to withstand,
before the liberation from the body (death) , the impulse born out
of desire and anger, he is a YOGIN , he is a happy man.
Krishna himself feels that his over-enthusiastic description
of the Perfect-man and his mental life may give to any
reader a despairing sense of impossibility or futility. No
one living the present life of agitations, can ever dare to
hope that such a perfect happiness is ever possible for a
mortal living upon this ever-spinning globe. If a
philosophy is only an idealism which has no contact with
the practical world, that philosophy is merely Utopian
poetry fit for entertaining a pleasant idea, but never
capable of making man a nobler being.
In order to remove that misunderstanding, Krishna, in this
stanza, gives the assurance that man is capable of living
that perfect joy in this VERY WORLD, if only he makes
the necessary adjustments in himself.
My great-grandfather was a great violinist. His violin was
preserved and worshipped in my house till now. I too
have gained now a preliminary nodding acquaintance
with music. Suddenly an idea struck me: "Why not take
my great-grandfather's instrument and play upon it and
thus become overnight a great musician?" If I play directly
383

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

upon that ancient and faithful instrument, I will be forced
to break it into pieces, for, that violin, in that condition,
cannot give me perfect music. It needs general cleaning
and dusting; perhaps, re-stringing and a lot of tuning up.
When these adjustments are made, then only can it
faithfully give out all the notes, implicitly obeying the
strokes of my bow and the ticklings of my finger. In the
same fashion, today, our mind and intellect, the
instruments of singing the song of Perfection, neglected
from beginningless time, need a lot of re-adjustments
before they can gurgle out their contents of laughter and
joy.
The technique of re-adjusting the inner-instruments is
beautifully summarised here by Lord Krishna. The very
brevity and simplicity of this verse are the obstacles to our
understanding its full import. The advice has a deceptive
look of simplicity. "WITHSTAND THE IMPULSE OF
DESIRE AND ANGER," then he is a Yogi, even while here,
before his death, the happy man. To a modern student of
Freud and others, soaked with the ideas of behaviourism
and such other modern superficialities of psychology, this
may look rather an unscientific expression of a crude
enthusiast. But when we analyse and try to grapple with
its full import and implication, we shall see that it contains
volumes of suggestions.
"Desire" is the avalanche of thoughts sweeping down from
the pinnacles of our intellect, along the valleys of our
heart, towards an object-of-desire in the outer world.
384

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When this avalanche of thought is barricaded on its sweep
by a substantial obstacle ere it reaches it destination, the
blast with which it shatters itself on that obstacle is called
"anger." It is these two types of thoughts that generally
agitate our bosom. The greater the desire with which we
ponder over an object, the greater shall be the anger
against any obstacle that comes between us and our
object-of-desire.
To one who has won over joy and grief, and who has
gained a certain amount of detachment from external
objects, desire for obtaining the pleasant or the unpleasant
is no emotion at all. Where there is no desire, hatred is an
unknown alien factor there. He who has gained over these
two impulses, powerful and almost irresistible as they are,
is he who can afford to live in this world of multiplicity
and imperfections as an independent solitary man of true
and steady happiness.
Thus Krishna assures Arjuna --- and through Arjuna all
others like us who will read and try to understand this
immortal scripture --- that man can live perfectly happily
even while in this form, among these very objects, in this
very world, during this very life, if only he, in his spiritual
evolution, learns to renounce his impulses of desire and
hatred.
WHAT SORT OF A MAN RESTING IN BRAHMAN,
ATTAINS BRAHMAN?... THE LORD SAYS:
385

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

24. He who is happy within, who rejoices within, who is
illuminated within, that YOGI attains Absolute Freedom or
MOKSHA, himself becomin g BRAHMAN.
From the above three stanzas it becomes clear that,
according to Krishna, none of the usual fields of joy and
happiness are visited by the man of perfection. Neither the
warmth of flesh, nor the thrills of emotions and the
ecstasies of thinking are available for him. Renouncing
them all and conquering both love and hatred, the Yogi, in
sheer transcendence, attains a realm of bliss, and Krishna
declares that such a man alone can be said to be really
happy.
It becomes very difficult to believe that a man in that
condition would feel any happiness at all. All instruments
of happiness have been rejected by him. There is no more
any field for him to gain joy or satisfaction. Renouncing all
food one cannot have any joy of eating.
Again, it is against the very logic and rhythm of life to say
that man will be satisfied by a mere emptiness, a dark
cave of total negation. Every living creature roams about
in all its available fields of activity seeking to gain and
achieve a greater fulfilment of joy. Even the state of
"complete absence of pain" --- though it is a platform of
relief --- is not the summit where an individual will feel
contented and fully satisfied.
386

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Under the above circumstances, it will be mere
exaggeration to believe Krishna's assertion in the previous
three stanzas. To avoid such a serious misunderstanding
among the students, the Lord is here trying to find out for
us the positive glow of assured Divinity when the ego
rediscovers itself to be the Self as it renounces all its
delusory preoccupations with the false and the fleeting.
The substantial and definite experience of solid bliss
enjoyed and lived by the Self, in the Self, as the Self, is
indicated here in this stanza.
The seeker, in his detachment, not only withdraws himself
from the world-of-objects outside, but also discovers in
himself an ampler sense of bliss and security. This inward
joy is not a rare flickering flash, but a constantly
experienced factor. Such a well-developed seeker striving
constantly on the path comes to discover a field of fruitful
'entertainment' and engaging 'recreation' in the brilliant
light of joyous satisfaction within himself.
To him his entire within is flooded with the Light of Pure
Consciousness. His heart is thereafter alit with the Glow
Divine.
Such an individual --- who has withdrawn himself
completely within, where he has learnt to enter at will and
court and live in It --- is the one who has come to KNOW
Brahman. In his realization of the Infinite he has come to
experience the
387

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Bliss of Brahman, the smokeless shrine of Truth.
MOREOVER:
25. Those RISHIS obtain Absolute Freedom or MOKSHA --whose sins have been destroyed, whose dualities are torn
asunder, who are self-controlled and intent on the welfare of all
beings.
When a man of meditation, striving diligently, with his
senses well under his control, comes to wash off all his
sinful mental impressions (which had been creating in
him the veiling of the Self behind an unending array of
doubts regarding the Reality), he gains the joy of the Self.
When his ignorance, which is nothing other than
agitations of the mind (Vikshepa) and the consequent
veiling of the Truth (Avarana), has been removed,
Knowledge of his Real Nature dawns in his bosom and he
re-discovers himself as the Self!
Having thus re-discovered the Self, having thus gained
the goal of all evolution, what would be the duties of such
an individual in this existence, till finally, with a cheerful
farewell, he drops his mortal coil down, to merge himself
with what he knows to be his own Self? The general
impression is that he will move about in the world like a
mad, walking, stone-statue --- that eats at least once a day,
a threat to society, a moving bundle of contagion and a
screaming pillar of despondency and despair. Such a
388

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

living death is not the goal indicated by the Vedas nor did
the Hindu Rishis ever try to carve out of a man, a walking
corpse!
Self-realisation is not a melancholy parade, crawling to a
pre-destined tomb, but it is a joyous ride to the Palace of
Truth, from which man has wandered away in his own
ignorance and confusion. A true prophet is one who lives,
consumed in an ever-reviving fire of love. He ceaselessly
strives to bring out the Self from the non-Self that is
veiling It, in all other forms around and about him. This is
indicated by the term "engaged in the good of all-beings."
This lokaseva becomes his recreation, his self-appointed
engagement. His body, mind and intellect are offered as
oblations into the sacred fires of activity and while
remaining at rest within himself, the Saint lives on, in an
unbroken Consciousness of the Divine, the Eternal.
MOREOVER:
26. Absolute Freedom (or BRAHMIC Bliss) exists on all sides
for those self-controlled ascetics, who are free from desire and
anger, who have controlled their thoughts and who have realised
the Self.
By the work of serving mankind --- the duties of
reinstating Godly life in the bosom of the Satanic Age, the
love in the heart that tries to redeem the prostitute or to
389

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

cure the leper, the joyful enthusiasm to light and guide
where darkness and blindness revel --- the Master is not
bartering away his chances to live as a God of gods even
in this world, here and now. Just as a doctor working
among the unhealthy and the suffering is not himself
contaminated by the diseases or the sorrows, so too a
master-mind working amongst the wretched and the
lustful, the passionate and the sensuous, the false and the
low, is not in any sense of the term touched, even by a
passing breeze, of the stink around him.
How this immunity is maintained and preserved by a man
of equipoise even amongst the temptations of the vicious
atmosphere is indicated here in this stanza. When a
sincere seeker has, through his own intelligent self-effort
and divine self-application, redeemed himself from the
secret charms of the ever murmuring hosts of senseappetites in himself --- when he has conquered the
instincts of lust and anger in him --- when he has thus
completely mastered all threats arising from within him
and those that come to him from without, such a sincere
pursuer of the Life Divine, when he has
known the Self, gains the Bliss of Perfection "BOTH HERE
AND HEREAFTER."
AND NOW, TO ENUNCIATE THE DHYANA YOGA,
THE NEAREST AND THE MOST EFFICIENT MEANS
TO RIGHT KNOWLEDGE, THE LORD TEACHES THE
390

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PATH OF MEDITATION IN THE FOLLOWING FEW
APHORISTIC VERSES:
27. Shutting out (all) external contacts and fixing the gaze (as
though) between the eye-brows, equalising the outgoing and
incoming breath moving within the nostrils,
28. With senses, mind and intellect (ever) controlled, having
liberation as his Supreme Goal, free from desire, fear and anger -- the sage is verily liberated for ever.
In these two aphoristic stanzas the Lord has hinted at the
summary of the entire following chapter. This is the
traditional style in Sanskrit text-books on Brahma-Vidya,
wherein each section is closed, often indicating the
following section.
The above verses give us a complete picture of the Manof-perfection and his purposeful life at all levels of his
existence. Students of Vedanta are ever anxious to live the
Perfection. They are not dreamers, content with flirting
with Utopian idealisms, but they are the most utilitarian,
practical men of the world, who want to live a more
purposeful, efficient and effective life in this world.
Therefore, they are not enamoured of mere ideas, however
noble they may be, unless those ideas can actually be lived
in life.

391

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

How to achieve the perfect mental equipoise which has
been indicated in the previous stanzas, should be the
question that must agitate the minds of all true seekers.
Here, as a summary, with lots of dots and dashes, Krishna
is giving the scheme of practice, by which every diligent
pursuer can gain a complete integration. These two
stanzas become rough notes to be enlarged and exhausted
with details and descriptions in the next chapter.
The external world-of-objects, it has already been said,
cannot by itself bring any disturbance to any one of us. It
is only when we are in contact with the world-of-objects
that we suffer the agitations in life. So long as we are
standing on the bank of a river or on the seashore, the
waves in the water cannot buffet us. It is only when we
are in contact with them that we will be tossed hither and
thither. Forms, sounds, tastes, smells and touches
constantly bring their objects to agitate the mind, but we
shall get agitated by them only when we are identifying
ourselves with our mental conditions. If we, therefore,
shut out the external object --- not by physical methods
such as plugging the ears, but by a discreet intellectual
detachment from our mental reactions to the external
world-of-objects --- we shall discover in ourselves, the
necessary tranquillity to start meditation.
It is a great mistake that seekers often take the foregoing
instruction too literally. They converge their eye-balls and
gaze towards the space between the eye-brows for the
purpose of meditation. This is an exaggeration, though it
392

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

faithfully follows the instructions laid down here. It is to
be understood, as Shankara says, "TO GAZE AS IT
WERE" towards the point between the two eye-brows. It is
psychologically very true that when we are looking "as it
were towards the brow," our gaze would be turned
upward at about forty-five degrees to the vertical
backbone. In that attitude of upward gaze, the human
mind is held uplifted and it becomes the right vehicle for
higher contemplation.
There is an intimate relationship between the rhythm of
the flow of breath in us and our own mental thoughtconditions. The more agitated the mind is, the more
spasmodic and uncertain becomes the rhythm of our
breathing. Therefore, the instructions here, which advise
us to control our breath-flow to make it "EVEN WITHIN
THE NOSTRILS" becomes a conducive physical practice
for coaxing the mind to a relatively quieter existence.
These instructions are all mainly physical adjustments for
creating a conducive mental atmosphere. In the following
stanza, the necessary adjustments to control the mental
and the intellectual sheaths are hinted at. The tireless
seeker is asked to control his sense appetites, mental
oscillations and intellectual storms by dedicating all his
outer and inner activities to the one great eternal goal of
reaching Perfection --- realizing the Self. As far as the
taming of the intellect is concerned, the advice given by
Krishna is that the seeker should "RENOUNCE DESIRES,
FEARS AND ANGER."
393

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In enumerating these three qualities, psychologically
speaking, Krishna has expounded an exhaustive theory of
self-development and inner growth. There is an intimate
relationship between these three: desire, fear and anger.
Desire, we had found earlier, is that pattern of thought in
which the mind runs constantly towards a given object
with an anxious expectation of procuring and possessing
it. Where there is desire, there we come to experience fear.
And it is very well known that when we desire a thing so
much as to live ever in the fear of losing it, maddening
anger can exhibit itself at any moment against any threat
of an obstacle between ourselves and our object-of-desire.
When these three emotions --- desire, fear and anger --are controlled, we have controlled almost all the mad
impulses of our intellect.
He who has thus freed himself from desire, fear and
anger, who has controlled his senses, mind and intellect,
in his all-consuming ambition for liberation, and who has
quietened the flow of his breath, such an individual could
remain in the contemplation of Truth, without contact
with the external world, his eyes fixed steadily and held in
an upward gaze. Krishna says: "such a man of meditation
is verily free for ever."
This assertion that such an individual "IS VERILY FREE
FOR EVER" is an anticipatory truth and not an
accomplished fact. In ordinary conversation, we use the
phrase "baking of bread," which, in its literal meaning is
false, since bread need not be baked; we bake only dough.
394

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

But in such usages, what we mean is that the goal is not
too far away from the particular act we are doing. Even
while boiling water, we say that we are making tea; the
idea is that tea-making cannot be far away when the water
has already been boiled. Similarly, here also, when we
have made all the above-mentioned adjustments, at all
levels of our existence, and when we sit in contemplation
of the Self, we become released from all our
misunderstandings and come to experience the freedom
of Godhood... ere long (achirena).
WHAT HAS HE, WHOSE MIND IS THUS STEADILY
BALANCED, TO KNOW AND MEDITATE UPON, IN
THE DHYANA YOGA?
29. Knowing Me as Enjoyer of sacrifices and austerities, the
Great Lord of all worlds, the friend of all beings, he attains
Peace.
HE ATTAINS PEACE ON KNOWING ME --- It is never to
be forgotten that, in the Geeta whenever Lord Krishna
uses the first person singular, he does not mean the mortal
framework of the son of Devaki, but indicates the Self in
the individual --- the Eternal Principle, Sri Krishna
Paramatman. The Self is the real vitality behind the ego
(Jiva) which functions in identification with the matterenvelopments and feels that it is the doer and enjoyer. The
term "Yajna" has been already explained earlier. In its
Geeta implication, Yajna is the self-dedicated work which
395

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

one performs in any field of activity. "Tapas" means all
self-denial and practices of self-control which the ego
undertakes in order to integrate and revive its own
capacities to seek its real identity with the Eternal.
The Self is certainly the "Maheshwara" --- the Lord of all
lords, the God of all gods. Here the Ishwara is to be
understood as the controller of all fields of activities:
activities of perception and expression. Each one of them
is considered as presided over by various faculties, and
they are termed as devas, meaning "illuminators." The
faculty of seeing illumines the field of the eyes and thus
gives the knowledge of forms and colours; the faculty of
hearing illumines the field of the ears and thus provides
the knowledge of sound, and so on. The Self is in fact the
Lord of all these individual lords governing, controlling
and ruling over the various fields. Therefore, Lord
Krishna as the Self confers upon Himself the title of
"Sarva-Loka-Maheshwarah."
In our ordinary experiences in the world, a man who has
kingly powers is very difficult to approach, and the King
of kings, a personality striking awe and reverence in the
heart of the ordinary man, becomes almost
unapproachable to the ordinary people. Therefore, the
Lord has to qualify his title of "Sarva Loka Maheshwarah"
with the epithet that he is at the same time "A FRIEND OF
ALL LIVING CREATURES."

396

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The term "knowing" is not objectively knowing Krishna, in
the sense in which we come to know a flower or a fruit,
but here the term "knowing" is to be understood as
"realising." Spiritual experience is the realisation of the
Self to be the one great ruler within, who presides over all
the activities within the body-politic, who is the One, at
whose altar the perfection-seeking ego surrenders all its
spiritual activities, and as a tribute to Whom, the seeker
brings all his self-denial and asceticism.
"KNOWING HIM TO BE NONE OTHER THAN
KRISHNA, THE INDIVIDUAL REACHES THE GOAL OF
PEACE, THE ETERNAL SANCTUM OF PERFECTION."
Thus in the UPANISHAD of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta, in
the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna the fifth discourse
ends entitled: YOGA OF TRUE RENUNCIATION.
Om Om Om Om Om

Chapter 6
397

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Dhyana Yoga
The Yoga of Meditation
The Blessed Lord said: 1. He who performs his bounden duty
without depending on the fruits-of-actions --- he is a
SAMNYASIN and a YOGIN ; not he who (has renounced) is
without fire and without action.
Arjuna's plan, in his own words in the first chapter, was to
escape from the battlefield in order to live the Samnyasalife. He did not know that a truly selfless worker is the
greatest Samnyasi, for, without renunciation, his action
would become, at best, only a mischievous meddling with
the harmony of the Universe.
To escape from the buzz of life in our present state of
unpreparedness into the quiet atmosphere of the banks of
the Ganges, is only the fall of an average good man to the
level of the insentient stone in the very Ganges. At the
close of this verse, Krishna laughs at Arjuna's sad
misconceptions. There is no bitterness in the irony of the
Lord. Soon we shall find that Arjuna also comes to laugh
at his own misunderstandings.
The whole chapter is so fully and entirely dedicated to
expounding the technique of cultivation, direction and
398

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

application of the inner forces of thoughts and feelings,
that it is very appropriate for Krishna to indicate the
greater importance of revolutionising our inner motives
and mental attitudes before we enter the path of
spirituality.
AS AN ELUCIDATING ANNOTATION FOR THE
QUIBBLE WHICH THE LORD HAD DECLARED IN THE
STANZA, WE HAVE HIS ADDED EXPLANATIONS IN
THE FOLLOWING, WHICH SHOW HOW SAMNYASA
ITSELF IS YOGA:
2. O Pandava, please know YOGA to be that which they call
renunciation; no one verily becomes a YOGI who has not
renounced thoughts.
Krishna is repeating the same idea, lest Arjuna should
overlook the fact that what they call Samnyasa, the
"renunciation of agency," is itself Yoga, the "renunciation
of the fruits-of-action." Samnyasa is the state reached
through Yoga, the practice; and the spiritual practice of
Yoga cannot even be thought of without the spirit of
Samnyasa in the bosom. The two are the obverse and the
reverse of the same coin of spiritual perfection!
It is but natural that the intellectually independent thinker
in Arjuna should, at this juncture, ask the question "Why?"
with raised brows, seeing which, the Charioteer implicitly
gives the logical reasons behind his seemingly outrageous
399

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and daring conclusion. The Lord explains that, never can
one become established in the practices for one's own
cultural-rehabilitation unless one has learnt the art of
renouncing all Sankalpas.
Man cannot ordinarily remain without imagining and
constantly creating, in his exuberant fancy. And in his
imagination he invariably tries to pull down the beautiful
veil thrown over the face of the future. Ripping open this
veil over the unknown, everyone of us, on all occasions, in
our imaginations, fix for ourselves a goal to be fulfilled by
us in the near future. Having fixed up the temporary goal,
our mind plans and creates a method of achieving that
hazy goal. But ere we execute our plans and enter into the
field of effort to carve out a success for ourselves, the
never-tiring, ever-active power of imagination in us
would already have wiped clean the goal fixed earlier,
and have rewritten a modified destination to be gained in
the future.
By the time we prepare ourselves mentally and start
executing our ideas in life, our mischievous fancy would
again have wiped the distant goal clean. Thus each time
the goal remains only so long as we have not started our
pilgrimage to it; and the moment we start the pilgrimage,
the goal fades away from our vision!
In short, when we have got a goal we have not yet started
acting, and the moment we start the strife, we seem to
have no goal to reach. The subtle force in our inner
400

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

composition which unconsciously creates this lunatic
temperament in us is called the unbridled Sankalpa Shakti.
We need no help from any great commentators to
understand that no achievement, either without or within
us, can be gained so long as we have not pursued,
arrested, and finally destroyed this dangerous inner
saboteur called 'Sankalpa.'
To show that there is no compromise in this, Bhagawan is
using a very positive term that none (kashchana) can ever
reach any progress on the path of self-redemption without
acquiring a capacity to renounce this self-poisoning
Sankalpa-disturbance.
KARMA YOGA, PRACTISED WITHOUT REGARD TO
THE FRUIT OF ACTION FORMS AN EXTERNAL AID
(BAHIRANGA SADHANA) TO DHYANA YOGA. THE
LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO SHOW HOW KARMA
YOGA IS A MEANS TO BETTER AND GREATER
MEDITATION.
3. For a MUNI or sage who "wishes to attain to YOGA, "
action is said to be the means; for the same sage who has
"attained to YOGA, " inaction (quiescence) is said to be the
means.
To one who is "DESIRING TO SCALE OVER THE
PRACTICE OF MENTAL CONCENTRATION AND
401

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SELF-IMPROVEMENT, WORK IS SAID TO BE THE
MEANS." By working in the world with neither the egocentric concept of agency nor the ego-centric desires for
the fruits of those actions, we are causing vasanas to play
out without creating any new precipitate of fresh
impressions.
The metaphor used here is borrowed from horse-riding,
and it is very powerful in its suggestions. When a wild
horse is being broken in, for some time, it will ride the
rider before the rider can ride it. If one desires to bring a
steed under perfect control, there is a period when, with
one leg on the stirrup, the individual has to hang on to the
saddle and with the other leg on the ground, must learn to
kick himself off from the ground and spring up and throw
his legs over the back of the animal, until he sits, with the
steed completely between his own legs. Having mounted,
it is easy to control the animal, but till then, the rider, in
his attempt to mount the horse, must pass through a stage
where he is neither totally on the horse nor on the ground.
In the beginning, we are merely workers in the world;
desire-prompted and ego-driven, we sweat and toil, weep
and sob. When an individual gets tired of such activities,
he comes to desire to mount the steed of the mind. Such
an individual, desiring to bring the mind under his control
and rise over it (Arurukshah) takes upon himself the same
work as before, but without the ego and ego-centric
desires. Such desireless activities undertaken in the YajnaSPIRIT explained earlier, (IV-18, 19 20, 21, and 25 to 30.)
402

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

cleanse the mind of its past impressions and integrate the
entire inner equipment. When thus the required amount
of concentration has been gained by the individual as a
result of the vasana-purgation effected, he is to stop his
activities slowly and apply himself more and more to live
in deeper meditation. When once his mind has been
conquered, and his agitations have become wellcontrolled, the seeker in that state of mental growth and
development, is termed as "having mounted the steed of
the mind" (Yoga-Arudhah). To such an individual, in that
state of mental equipoise and self-application,
"quiescence" (Shama) is the means for gaining higher
perfection and self-growth.
By thus prescribing two methods at the two distinct stages
of the individual's growth, it is meant that they are not
contradictory. Selfless activity is good at a stage but
afterwards it becomes a positive agitation which brings
the mind down from its serener flights, and frequently
bumps it on the ground with a shattering shock. Specially
prepared milk powder, diluted with hot water, is the full
diet for an infant. But the same feeding-bottle will not
satisfy the growing demands of a boy vigorously working
and mischievously knocking about all day. The more solid
bread and butter are his diet. We need not be great
intellectuals to understand that buttered toast will choke
and kill an infant.
Similarly here, work without self is healthy for the
beginner, but a developed seeker needs more and more
403

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

quietude and self-withdrawal for growing in the steady
contemplation of life within. Earlier, 'work-without-self' is
the means, afterwards 'work-on-self' is the means; and the
process is continued until, working or not working,
through meditation, it is realised that the Self alone is the
essence in the ego which, till then, was recognised as the
only reality.
In this sense of the term, we clearly know how ritualism
has a definite place in the scheme of things as mapped out
by the Vedantin Seers of unimpeachable intellectual
eminence.
WHEN IS A MAN SAID TO BE A YOGARUDHAH --- TO
HAVE ATTAINED TO YOGA?... THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:
4. When a man is not attached to sense-objects or to actions,
having renounced all thoughts, then he is said to have attained
to YOGA.
It is the experience of everyone, and therefore, it is not
very difficult for a young seeker to know the state of an
aspirant (Arurukshah). It has been said by the Lord that so
long as we are in the state of seeking, the Path of SelfPerfection is the highroad of selfless activity. Withdrawal
from activity is to be undertaken only when you have
reached the state of mental mastery (Yogarudhah). To
renounce activity at an earlier stage, would be as
404

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

unhealthy as to continue disturbing the mind with
activities after having reached the second stage, where, we
are told, quiescence is the means for gathering speed in
our flight through meditation. Naturally, it is necessary
for the seeker to know when exactly he reaches the second
stage, indicated here by the term Yogarudhah.
In this stanza, Krishna is pointing out the physical and
mental conditions of one who has broken in the steed of
his mind and ridden it. He says that when one is feeling
no mental attachments, either to the sense-objects or to the
actions in the outer world, it is one of the symptoms of
perfect mastery over the mind. This should not be overstressed to a dreary literal meaning, making it a grotesque
caricature of Truth. It only means that the mind of a seeker
in the meditation seat is so perfectly withdrawn from the
external world of sense-objects and activities, that it is
perfect in its equipoise at the time of self-application. The
sense-organs can run into the channels of sense-objects
only when the mind is flowing out of the organs. If the
mind is kept engaged in the contemplation of a great
Truth, providing a larger quota of an ampler joy in the
inner bosom, it will no more go hunting for bits of joy in
the gutters of sensuality. A well-fed pet dog will not seek
the public dust-bins for its food.
When thus the mind is not gushing out either through the
sense-channels or through the fields of its ego-centric
activities, it becomes completely engaged in the
contemplation of the greater truth --- the Self. Here the
405

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

term used to indicate complete non-attachment, is to be
noted very carefully. The Sanskrit word anu-shaijate is a
word-symbol created by prefixing an indeclinable anu to
the verb shaj, meaning 'attached.' The prefix anu indicates
'not a bit'. Therefore, the term used here forbids even
traces of attachment either to the sense-objects or to the
fields of activity.
When the mind has been withdrawn from the senseorgans and completely detached from all its external
physical activities, it is possible that it is still tossed and
agitated by the gurglings of its own inner instincts of
willing and wishing, desiring and earning. This power of
Sankalpa can bring more storms into the bosom of a man
than the disturbances his mind could ever receive from
the external world. Krishna indicates here that he who has
gained a complete mastery over his mind is one who has
not only withdrawn himself from all sense-contacts and
activities in the outer world, but has also dried up all the
Sankalpa-disturbances in his own mind. Such an
individual is, at the moment of meditation, in that inward
state which is described here as Yogarudhah. It is clear that,
to such an individual, meditation can be intensified only
by quietude (Shama).
WHEN A MAN HAS ATTAINED YOGA, THEN THE
SELF IS RAISED BY THE SELF, FROM OUT OF THE
NUMEROUS
EVILS
OF
FINITE
EXISTENCE
THEREFORE:
406

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

5. Let a man lift himself by his own Self alone, and let him not
lower himself; for, this Self alone is the friend of oneself, and this
Self is the enemy of oneself.
As a complete Shastra, the Geeta has to be faithful to Truth
and Truth alone, irrespective of what the tradition of the
country, at a given period, might have made the faithful
ones believe. It is not very unhealthy to believe that Grace
from an external source is constantly helping a true seeker
striving on his path --- but this is really healthy only when
this thought is correspondingly complemented with
sufficiently intense self-effort. "MAN SHOULD UPLIFT
HIMSELF BY HIMSELF," is an open statement declared
by no less a person than Lord Krishna Himself --- not
cooed in a playful mood in the company of the gopis on
the Jamuna-banks at a hilarious hour of laughter and play,
but roared to Arjuna on the battlefield at a serious
moment of His life's fulfilment as an Avatara. Man, if he
wants to exalt himself into the greater cultural and
spiritual possibilities now lying dormant in him, has to
raise the lower in himself to the greater perfection that is
the true and eternal core in himself.
Everyone has in himself a picture of the ideal. This
intellectual conception of ourselves is always very vivid in
each one of us. But unfortunately, this ideal remains only
in the realm of thought and is not lived in the world of
activity. Intellectually we may have a clear and vivid
picture of what we should be, but mentally and physically
407

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

we behave as though we were the opposites of our own
ideal concepts. The gulf between the 'IDEAL-ME' and the
'ACTUAL-ME' is the measure of man's fall from his
perfection.
Most of us are generally unconscious of this duality in
ourselves. We mistakes ourselves to be the ideal and are
generally blind to our own ACTUAL imperfections. Thus
we find a notoriously selfish man in society warmly and
sincerely criticising the slightest traces of selfishness in his
neighbour! In a world of no mirrors, it is possible that a
squint-eyed man may laugh at another squint-eyed person
because the one who laughs knows not the angle in which
his own eye-balls are facing each other!!
Within ourselves, if we, carefully watch, we can discover
that intellectually we have a clear concept of a morally
strong, ethically perfect, physically loving and socially
disciplined man that 'we should be'; but in the mental
zones of our emotions and feelings, however, we are
tantalised by our own attachments, likes and dislikes,
loves and hatreds, appetites and passions, and we behave
like curs fed by the way-side gutters and ever quarrelling
with others of the same ilk over dry and marrowless
bones!!
As long as the individual has not realised the existence of
this dual personality in himself, there cannot be any
religion for him. If an individual has discovered that there
is "enough in him to be divided into two portions," and
408

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

when he wants to keep the lower as brilliant and chaste as
the higher, the technique that he will have to employ to
fulfil this aspiration is called RELIGION.
Mind is the saboteur that enchants us away from
perfection, to be a slave to the flesh and the external
objects of brittle satisfaction. Mind is the conditioning that
distorts the ideal and creates the lower Satanic sensuous
self in us, which is to be brought into unison with the
intellect, the equipment for the higher Self to manifest. In
short, when the rational and discriminative capacities of a
limited intellect are brought to bear their authority upon
the wavering and wandering, sense-mongering-mind, the
lower is brought under discipline and made to attune with
the nobler and the diviner in us. The processes by which
the lower is brought under the direct management and
discipline of the higher are all together called the spiritual
techniques.
This process of self-rehabilitation and self-redemption of
the Satan in us cannot be executed by inviting tenders and
giving the contract to the lowest bidder! Each will have to
do it all by himself: "ALONE TO THE ALONE ALL
ALONE" IS THE WAY. No Guru can take the
responsibility; no scripture can promise this redemption;
no altar can, with its divine blessings, make the lower the
higher. The lower must necessarily be trained slowly and
steadily to accept and come under the influence of the
discipline of the higher. In this process, the teacher, the
scripture, and the houses-of-God, have all their proper
409

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

appointed duties and limited influences. But the actual
happening depends upon how far we ourselves learn to
haul ourselves out from the gutters of misunderstanding
in ourselves.
So far Bhagawan has indicated an exhaustive treatment
which may be, in many of its aspects, considered as
equivalent to the modern psychological process called
introspection. Realising our own weaknesses, rejecting the
false, asserting the better, and trying to live, generally, as
best as we can, the higher way-of-life, is the process of
introspection. But his is only half the entire process and
not the whole of it.
The other half also is insisted upon, here, by Krishna. It is
not only sufficient that we look within, come to note our
weaknesses, erase them, substitute the opposite good
qualities, and develop in ourselves the better, but we must
see to it, that, whatever little conquests we might have
made out of Satan's province are not again handed back to
Satan's dominion. Krishna warns, almost in the same
breath, "DO NOT ALLOW THE SELF THEREAFTER TO
FALL DOWN AND BE DRAGGED AGAIN" to the old
level of the cheaper way of existence.
The second line of the stanza contains a glorious idea
shaped into a beauty of expression which almost
immortalises Vyasa. We are considered both as our own
friend and our own enemy. Any intelligent man observing
and analysing life will vouchsafe for the truth of the
410

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

statement, but here, more is meant philosophically, than
meets the eye. Generally, we do not fully understand the
import when we say "THE SELF IS THE FRIEND OF THE
SELF."
The lower in us can ever raise itself to the attunement of
the Higher, but the Higher can influence only when the
lower is available for Its influence. To the extent the lesser
in us surrenders itself to the influence of the Higher, to
that extent, It can serve the lower as a great friend. But if
the lower refuses to come under the influence of the
Diviner in us, the Divine Presence is accused as an enemy
of ourselves, inasmuch as the dynamism of life provides
us Its energy both for our "life of higher aspirations" and
the "life of low temptations."
Ultimately, it is for the aspirant himself to accept the
responsibility for blessing or damning himself. The
potentiality for improvement, the chances for self-growth,
the strength to haul ourselves out from our own
misconceptions, are ever open for employment. But it all
depends upon how we make use of them.
NOW IT MAY BE ASKED: "WHAT SORT OF A MAN IS
THE FRIEND OF HIMSELF AND WHAT SORT OF A
MAN IS THE ENEMY OF HIMSELF?" THE ANSWER
FOLLOWS:

411

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

6. The Self is the friend of the self for him who has conquered
himself by the Self, but to the unconquered self, the Self stands
in the position of an enemy like the (external) foe.
The Divine in us becomes a friend when, under its
influence, the Satan in us gets converted. To the extent the
lower ego withdraws itself from its identifications with
the body and the sense-organs, feelings and ideas relating
to the extrovert life, to that extent that given ego has come
under the salutory influence of the nobler and the Diviner.
To such an ego, available for corrective proselytisation, the
Self is a friend. But where the little self remains a constant
rebel against the Higher, to that unconquered-self, the
Diviner Self is as if inimical in Its attitude.
In short, the higher Self becomes a friend to the lower
which is available for and which allows itself to be
conquered by the higher influence; and the Diviner
becomes inimical to the undivine when the lower limited
ego remains unconquered by the higher aspirations in us.
This stanza is an elucidating annotation on the previous
one.
EARLIER, THE STATE OF MENTAL EQUIPOISE,
CALLED YOGARUDHAH, WAS EXPLAINED. WHAT
EXACTLY IS THE FULFILMENT OF SUCH A STATE IN
YOGA IS BEING EXPLAINED NOW:

412

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

7. The Supreme Self of him who is self-controlled and peaceful,
is balanced in cold and heat, pleasure and pain, as also in
honour and dishonour.
When a seeker has come in his inner life to the state
explained as Yogarudhah, and when in that State of
equipoise, the mind is held steadfast in contemplation
over the Supreme, the self-controlled one, in all serenity, is
capable of maintaining his consistency of meditation in all
circumstances, favourable and adverse, at all levels of his
personality. In the second line of the stanza it is clearly
indicated that no excuse in the world is sufficiently strong
to justify a seeker's inability to continue keeping the
awareness of his Eternal Nature in himself.
Three pairs-of-opposites are indicated here as: (i) heat and
cold; (ii) joy and sorrow; (iii) honour and dishonour. In
enumerations of these three pairs of conditions, Krishna is
exhausting, through the mention of the types, all possible
threats to his equipoise and tranquillity that an individual
may get from the outer world.
HEAT AND COLD --- These are stimuli that are felt and
experienced by the body, at the body level. Whether in
heat or in cold, thoughts, we know, do not expand or
shrink, and the ideas cannot shiver or perspire. All these
reactions can be only in the body, and therefore, Krishna
is indicating by this pair all the vicissitudes that may visit
the body, such as health and disease, youth and old-age,
etc.
413

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

By the second pair-of-opposites indicated here as
PLEASURE AND PAIN, the Lord is symbolically
indicating all the destinies suffered in the mental zone.
Pleasure and pain are experienced not by the body but
always by the mind. It includes all the tyrannies of our
different emotions which might threaten the mental arena,
at one time or another in a man's life. Hatred and love,
affection and jealousy, kindness and cruelty... a thousand
varieties of emotions may storm the 'within'; but none of
them is an excuse, according to Krishna, for the diligent
and the sincere to lose hold of himself from the
steadfastness in his contemplation.
Similarly also, the last pair-of-opposites indicated as
HONOUR AND DISHONOUR shows how no threat of
any storm in the intellectual zone is a sufficient plea to
sympathise with an individual who has fallen away from
the State of Perfection. Honour and dishonour are
evaluated and reacted to only by the intellect.
Thus, by these three representative pairs-of-opposites
from the three worlds of the body, the mind, and the
intellect, Krishna is trying to exhaust all possibilities of
obstacles in man's life, and then he adds that in all such
conditions, the Supreme Self is to be the object of constant
realisation for one who is perfectly self-controlled and
serene. He ever remains unruffled in all circumstances --favourable or unfavourable; in all environments --- good
or bad; in all companies --- wise or foolish.
414

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHAT IS THE GLORY OF SUCH AN INDIVIDUAL?
WHAT DOES HE BECOME BY SUCH A PROCESS? WHY
SHOULD HE GO THROUGH SUCH A LABORIOUS
INWARD TRAINING AND SELF-DISCIPLINE?
8. The YOGI who is satisfied with knowledge and wisdom, who
remains unshaken, who has conquered the senses, to whom a
lump of earth, a stone and gold are the same, is said to be
harmonised (i. e. , is said to have attained NIRVIKALPA
SAMADHI) .
Such an individual, self-controlled and serene, who has
constantly come to contemplate upon the Nature of the
Self as understood from the Shastras, through all his
circumstances in life, soon becomes, says Krishna, filled
with a divine satisfaction and becomes an unshakable
Yogin. Here, the satisfaction is not merely the joy that an
intelligent man comes to enjoy when he carefully studies
and masters Vedanta, but, according to Krishna, the
satisfied contentment which a true Yogin comes to
experience and which is much superior to the thrilled joys
experienced in all intense studies.
The knowledge gained through study is indicated here by
the term Jnana, and the first-hand experience gained by
the seeker of the Self in himself is called the Knowledge of
direct perception, which is termed here, in the Geetavocabulary, as Vijnana.
415

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

UNCHANGING, IMMUTABLE (Kootasthah) --- This is the
term used for the Eternal Self. Its expressiveness becomes
apparent when we understand that the term "koota" in
Sanskrit, means the "anvil." The anvil is that upon which
the blacksmith places his red-hot-iron-bits and hammers
them into the required shapes. In spite of the hammerings,
nothing happens to the anvil as the anvil resists all
modifications and change, but allows all other things to
get changed upon it. Thus, the term "kootasthah" means
that which "remains anvil-like" and though itself suffers
no change, it makes others change.
He is a saint and has the full-blown fragrance of
perfection, who has sought and discovered a perfect
contentment which arises out of this subjective experience
of what the Shastra says, and has come in contact with the
Self that changes not. And such a saint becomes tranquil
and a master of equal-vision in all conditions of life. To
him, a clod of mud, a precious stone and costly gold are
all the same. This equanimity of mind in profit and loss, at
the acquisition of precious things or at the presentation of
mere filth, is the very test to show that the individual has
spiritually evolved and that to him no gain can bring any
extra joy, nor any loss --- any sorrow!!
In my dream I earned a lot of wealth, but ere I enjoyed it
fully, I woke up to my waking-state, poverty. In my
destitution, when I am suffering the pangs of hunger, I
will not feel, in any sense of the term, consoled by the
thought that I was rich in my dream and that in my
416

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dream-bank I had my dream-riches in its dream-vaults!
Similarly, to a master who has gained perfection and
transcended the world of the mind and intellect, and
achieved the true awakening of the Soul, thereafter, a
lump of earth, a piece of gold or a precious stone of this
world are all equally futile things. They cannot add even a
jot of extra joy or pain unto him. He has become the sole
proprietor of Bliss Absolute. To Kubera, the treasurer of the
heavens, a kingdom on the globe is no profit and has no
power to make him dance in ecstasy!!
MOREOVER:
9. He who is of the same mind to the good-hearted, friends,
enemies, the indifferent, the neutral, the hateful, relatives, the
righteous and the unrighteous, he excels.
In the previous stanza it was indicated that the man of
perfection develops equal-vision as far as things of the
world are concerned. The universe is not made of things
alone, but is constituted of beings also. Now the doubt
arises, what will be the relationship of a perfect man of
equipoise with the living kingdom of beings around him?
Will he negate the whole lot as unreal? In his
preoccupations with the experience of the Eternal and the
Immortal, which is the substratum for the entire world of
changing phenomenal beings, will he ignore to serve the
world and help the living generation? This idea is taken
up here for discussion.
417

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Such a man of excellence, says Krishna, regards all
relationships with an equal love and consideration, be
they "FRIENDS, OR FOES, OR INDIFFERENT OR
NEUTRAL, OR HATEFUL, OR NEAREST RELATIONS."
In his equal-vision, all of them are equally important and
he embraces, in his Infinitude, all of them with the same
warmth and ardour.
His love knows no distinction between the righteous and
the unrighteous, the good and the bad. To him a sinner is
but an ego living in its misunderstandings, since sin is
only a mistake of the soul and not a positive blasphemy
against Itself. Rama Tirtha beautifully expresses it when
he says that "we are punished BY the sin and not FOR it."
In the right understanding of his own Self and the
resulting realisation of his own Self, he becomes the Self
everywhere. He discovers a unity in the perceived
diversity and a subtle rhythm in the obvious discord in
the world outside. To him, who has realised himself to be
the Self which is all-pervading, the entire universe
becomes his own Self, and therefore, his relationship with
every other part of the universe is equal and same.
Whether I get wounded in the hand or the leg, on the back
or in the front, on the head or on the shoulder, it is the
same to me, since I am equally identifying with my head,
my trunk, and my legs, as myself.

418

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THROUGH WHAT METHODS CAN ONE ATTAIN THIS
HIGHEST GOAL AND ASSURE FOR HIMSELF THE
SUREST RESULT? IT IS EXPLAINED:
10. Let the YOGI try constantly to keep the mind steady,
remaining in solitude, alone, with the mind and body controlled,
free from hope and greed.
In the Mahabharata, Krishna is conceived as a voluntary
manifestation of the Supreme and hence He is addressed
as Shri Krishna Paramatman. He is giving here an advice to
His most intimate friend and life's companion, Arjuna, on
the methods of self-development and the techniques of
self-perfection. Even then, it is not said that the Lord will
give him a secret method by which he will not have to
make any struggle at all and that the entire responsibility
will be borne by the Creator of the Universe. The very
opening words of the stanza weed out any such false
hopes in the minds of the seekers. "O MAN OF SELFCONTROL (YOGI), YOU SHOULD CONSTANTLY
PRACTISE CONCENTRATION." It is only through the
practice of meditation that a mortal can grow out of his
weaknesses and flower forth culturally into the greater
perfection-possibilities within himself.
Details of how the meditation is to be conducted are given
in the rest of the stanza. "SITTING IN SOLITUDE," one
should practise meditation. This word has been,
unnecessarily, so overstretched in recent times in India
419

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

that the term "meditation" brings a sense of horror and
fear into the minds of the early seekers. It does not mean
that meditation can be practised only in the jungles and in
the solitude of caves. It only means that the seeker should
try to withdraw himself from his mental and physical
preoccupations and should retire to a corner in his house,
for the purpose of early meditation.
Solitude can be gained only when there is a mental
withdrawal from the world outside. One who is full of
desires and constantly meditating upon the sense-objects,
cannot hope to gain any solitude even in a virgin forest.
Again, the word solitude (Rahasi) suggests a meaning of
secretiveness, indicating that religion should not be a
broadcast of self-advertisement, but must be a set of true
values of life, secretly practised within the heart, ordering
our way of thinking and encouraging our pursuit of the
nobler values in life.
PHYSICALLY ALONE (Ekaki) --- For the purpose of
meditation, when one strives, his success in inward
quietude will be directly proportional to the amount of
self-control he is practising in his daily life. Self-control is
not possible unless we know how to free ourselves from
the "eagerness to possess" and the "anxiety to hoard." To
renounce our preoccupations with our endless plans for
possessing more is indicated here by the term "free from
hope" (Nirashih). And the term "free from possessions"
(Aparigraha) indicates all our anxieties in saving, hoarding
and protecting what we possess.
420

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When one, well-established in these necessary physical
self-controls and essential mental and intellectual habits,
sits meditating upon the Truth in all secrecy, he is a true
seeker striving on the right path to achieve and acquire
the highest that is possible in life.
NOW, IN THE SEQUEL, THE LORD PROCEEDS TO
PRESCRIBE
FOR
THE
YOGA-PRACTITIONER
PARTICULAR MODES OF SITTING, EATING,
RECREATION AND THE LIKE, THAT ARE AIDS TO
YOGA. FIRST OF ALL, HE EXPLAINS THE MODE OF
SITTING AS FOLLOWS:
11. Having, in a clean spot, established a firm seat of his own,
neither too high nor too low, made of a cloth, a skin and
KUSHA -grass, one over the other, . . .
If meditation is the path by which one can gain
tranquillity and equal-vision within oneself, it is necessary
that, in this text-book on self-perfection, Lord Krishna
should give a complete and exhaustive explanation of the
technique of meditation. In order to fulfil this demand,
hereunder we get a few verses explaining the position, the
means and the ends of a meditator at his work.
In these words is a description of the seat and the place for
perfect meditation.

421

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"IN A CLEAN PLACE" --- This is important inasmuch as
the external conditions have a direct bearing upon the
human mind. In a clean place there is more chance for the
seeker to maintain a cleaner mental condition. Apart from
this, commentators explain that the place should be rid of
mosquitoes, house-flies, bugs, ants and such other
creatures that may disturb the beginner's mental
concentration which he is trying to turn inward.
In his seat, the meditator is asked to sit steady (Sthiram).
Without moving the physical body at short intervals and
without swinging the body either forward and backward
or sideways, the seeker is asked to get firmly established
on his seat, because physical movement immensely
contributes to the shattering of mental concentration and
inner equipoise. This is very well realised by all of us, if
we only remember our attitude when we are sincerely and
seriously thinking over something. In order to get
established in a firm posture it would be advisable to sit in
any "comfortable seat" (Asana), with the vertebral column
erect, fingers interlocked and hands thrown in front.
Adding more details, Krishna says that the seat of
meditation "should not be too high or too low." If it is too
high there will be a sense of insecurity in the meditator,
created as a result of instinct of self-preservation, and he
will find it difficult to extricate himself from his outerworld-consciousness and plunge himself into the inner.
Again, we are told that the seat should not be too low; this
is to avoid the mistake of meditating in any damp under422

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ground cellar, where perchance, the seeker may develop
rheumatic pains in his body. During meditation the heartaction becomes slightly low, and, to the extent we are
withdrawn into ourselves, even the blood pressure falls.
At such a time of low resistance, if the place be damp,
there is a great chance of a seeker developing pains in his
joints. To avoid such troubles, the warning is given here.
When the Geeta is out to give details, she leaves nothing
to the imagination of the student. The exhaustive details
regarding the ideal seat for meditation is an example. It is
said here that a mattress of Kusha-grass on the ground,
with a deer-skin covered with a piece of cloth on top of it,
is the perfect seat for long meditations. Dampness is
avoided
by the Kusha-grass which keeps the seat warm during
winter. In summer the skin becomes too hot and some
seekers are allergic to the animal skin, especially when
their skin has become slightly moist with perspiration.
This contingency is being avoided by spreading over the
skin a piece of clean cloth. Having thus established
himself firmly on the meditation seat, prepared as above,
what exactly he is to do mentally and intellectually, is now
explained.
WHAT SHOULD BE DONE AFTER ESTABLISHING
ONESELF UPON THE PREPARED SEAT?

423

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

12. There, having made the mind one-pointed, with the actions
of the mind and the senses controlled, let him, seated on the seat,
practise YOGA, for the purification of the self.
However scientifically prepared it might be, to sit in an
appropriate Asana (seat) is not, in itself, Yoga. The
appropriate physical condition is conducive to generating
the right mental attitude for the spiritual practices, but a
mere physical posture cannot in itself, guarantee any
spiritual self-development.
In this verse, Krishna is giving what the seeker should
practise in his seat of meditation. Having made the body
steadfast in posture, how one should employ his mind
and intellect in the process of divine contemplation and
meditation is the theme being discussed here. The first
instruction given is that "YOU SHOULD MAKE THE
MIND SINGLE-POINTED." This instruction cannot be
worked out by a seeker unless he knows how he can bring
about this necessary inward condition in himself. It is very
cheap and easy for a Rishi to advise the members of the
confused generation to make their minds integrated.
Such an advice, when not sufficiently supported by
practical details, becomes a mere high-sounding
philosophy and not a useful guidance for the seekers. The
Geeta, being a text-book which translates philosophy into
life in its typical spirit, here the stanza immediately
explains how we can bring the mind to an ideal singlepointedness.
424

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SUBDUING THE FACULTY OF IMAGINATION AND
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE SENSE-ORGANS --- This is the
instruction given by Krishna. Single-pointedness is the
very potent nature of the mind but the mind gets stunned
by its own silence, confused and even mad when it gets
dynamised by either the inner forces of its own surging
imaginations or the outward pull exerted by the
hallucinations of the sense-organs. If these two venues of
dissipation are blocked, instantaneously the mind
becomes, by its own nature, single-pointed.
Thus, seated on the prepared meditation-seat, and making
the mind single-pointed through the process of subduing
mental imaginations and controlling the wild activities of
the sense-organs, the seeker is encouraged to practise
Yoga. To keep the single-pointed mind constantly at the
steady contemplation of the Ultimate Self is the inner Yoga
that has been mentioned here.
Naturally, every seeker would desire to know why he
should meditate thus. In order to remove all misunderstandings of the meditators that they would thereby
directly come face to face with the Atman, Krishna here
appends to the verse the effects of such meditation.
Through steady and regular meditation, the Shastra
promises inner purification only. Agitations in the mind
are its impurities. A purified mind is that which has no
agitations and when the mind has thus become pure and
steady, the Consciousness, looking at the steady reflection
of Itself, comes to rediscover Its own Real Nature. This
425

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

process is similar to the techniques by which we
understand ourselves while consulting our own
reflections in a mirror.
THE EXTERNAL SEAT HAS BEEN DESCRIBED. NOW,
WHAT SHOULD BE THE POSTURE OF THE BODY?
LISTEN:
13. Let him firmly hold his body, head and neck erect and still,
gazing at the tip of his nose, without looking around.
After describing in detail the arrangement of the seat of
meditation and how to sit there properly, Lord Krishna
had thereafter explained what the meditator should do
with his mind and intellect. He has also said that the mind
should be made single-pointed by subduing all the
activities of the sense-organs and the imagination. Adding
more details to the technique of meditation, it is now said
that the meditator should firmly hold his body in such a
fashion that his vertebral column is completely erect. The
head and the neck should be erect in this posture, which is
geometrically perpendicular to the horizontal seat upon
which the Yogi is firmly settling himself; it is pointedly
indicated that he should hold his body "firmly."
This term should not be misunderstood as holding the
body in tension. "Firmly" here means that the body should
not be held stiffly but relaxed, it must be held in such a
426

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

manner that there should not be any tendency to swing
forward and backward or sideways from right to left.
The seeker, having thus made himself ready for
meditation, should "GAZE AT THE TIP OF THE NOSE."
This does not mean that an individual should, with halfopened eyes, deliberately turn his eye-balls towards the
"tip of his own nose." There are many seekers who have
come to suffer physical discomforts, such as headaches,
giddiness, exhaustion, tensions, etc., because they have
tried to follow this instruction too literally. Shankara, in
his commentary, has definitely given us the right
direction. He says that the term here means only that the
meditator, while meditating, should have his attention
"AS THOUGH TURNED TOWARDS THE TIP OF HIS
OWN NOSE." That this interpretation is not a laboured
and artificial intellectualism of the Acharya is clearly borne
out by the next phrase in the second line.
NOT LOOKING AROUND --- This instruction clearly
shows what was in the mind of Krishna when he gave the
instruction that the meditator should direct his entire
attention towards the tip of his own nose --- so that his
concentration may not be dissipated and his mind may
not wander all around. Where the eyes go, there the mind
faithfully follows; this is the law. That is why, when an
individual is confused, we find that his gaze is not steady.
Many a time we judge another individual as behaving
funny or suspicious, and in all such cases our evidence is
nothing other than the unsteadiness in his gaze. Watch
427

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

anyone who is indecisive and who is unsteady in his
determination and you can immediately observe that the
individual's look is definitely unsteady and confusedly
wandering.
MOREOVER:
14. Serene-minded, fearless, firm in the vow of
BRAHMACHARYA, having controlled the mind, thinking on
Me and balanced, let him sit, having Me as the Supreme Goal.
When the meditator has thus practised meditation for a
certain period of time, as a result of his practice, he comes
to experience a larger share of quietude and peace in his
mind. This extremely subtle form of inward peace is
indicated here by the term "Prashanta." This inward
silence, a revelling in an atmosphere of extreme joy and
contentment --- is the exact situation in which the
individual can be trained to express the nobler and the
diviner qualities which are inherent in the Divine Self.
A meditator invariably finds it difficult to scale into the
higher realms of experience due to sheer psychological
fear-complex. As the Yogin slowly and steadily gets
unwound from his sensuous vasanas, he gets released, as it
were, from the cruel embrace of his own mental octopus.
At this moment of transcendence, the unprepared seeker
feels mortally afraid of the thought that he is getting
himself dissolved into "NOTHINGNESS." The ego,
428

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

because of its long habit of living in close proximity to its
own limitations, finds it hard even to believe that there is
an Existence Supreme, Divine and Infinite. One is
reminded of the story of the stranded fisher-women who
complained that they could not get any sleep at all when
they had to spend the night in a flower-shop, till they put
their baskets very near their noses. Away from our pains,
we dread to enter the Infinite Bliss!
This sense of fear is the death-knell of all spiritual
progress. Even if progress were to reach the bosom of
such an individual, he would be compelled to reject it,
because of the rising storm of his subjective fear.
Even though the mind has become extremely peaceful and
joyous, and has renounced all its sense of fear through the
study of the Scriptures and continuous practice of regular
meditation, the progress is not assured because the
possibility of failure shall ever hang over the head of the
seeker, unless he struggles hard to get established in
perfect Brahmacharya.
THE ASCETICISM OF BRAHMACHARYA --- Here the
phrase implies not only its Upanishadic implications, but
definitely something more original, especially when it
comes from Lord Krishna's mouth and that too, in the
context of
the Geeta. Brahmacharya, generally translated as 'celibacy,'
has a particular meaning, but the term has also a wider
429

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and a more general implication. Brahmacharya is not
ONLY the control of the sex-impulses but is also the
practice of self-control in all avenues of sense-impulses
and sense-satisfactions. Unless the seeker has built up a
perfect cage of intelligent self-control, the entire world-ofobjects will flood his bosom, to bring therein a state of
unending chaos. A mind thus agitated by the inflow of
sense stimuli, is a mind that is completely dissipated and
ruined.
Apart from this meaning, which is essentially indicative of
the goal, or rather, a state of complete detachment from
the mind's courtings of the external world-of-objects, there
is a deeper implication to this significant and famous
term. Brahmacharya, as such, is a term that can be
dissolved in Sanskrit to mean "wandering in BrahmaVichara." To engage our mind in the contemplation of the
Self, the Supreme Reality, is the saving factor that can
really help us in withdrawing the mind from external
objects.
The human mind must have one field or another to
engage itself in. Unless it is given some inner field to
meditate upon, it will not be in a position to retire from its
extrovert pre-occupations. This is the secret behind all
success in "total celibacy." The successful Yogin need not
be gazed at as a rare phenomenon in nature, for his
success can be the success of all, only if they know how to
establish themselves in this inward self-control. It is
because people are ignorant of the positive methods to be
430

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

practised for a continuous and successful negation and
complete rejection of the charms of the sense-organs, that
they invariably fail in their endeavour.
Naturally, it becomes easy for the individual who has
gained in himself all the three above-mentioned qualities
to control and direct the new-found energies in himself.
The inward peace, an attribute of the intellect, comes only
when the discriminative faculty is relatively quiet.
Fearlessness brings about a great control over the
exhausting thought commotions in the mental zone.
Brahmacharya, in its aspect of sense-withdrawal, lends a
larger share of physical quietude. Therefore, when, by the
above process, the intellect, mind and body are all
controlled and brought to the maximum amount of peace
and quietude, the 'way of life' pursued by the seeker
provides for him a large saving of mental energy which
would otherwise have been spent away in sheer
dissipation.
This newly-discovered and fully availed-of strength
makes the mind stronger and stronger, so that the seeker
experiences in himself a growing capacity to withdraw his
wandering mind unto himself and to fix his entire
thoughts "in the contemplation of Me, the Self."
The concluding instruction in this most significant verse in
the chapter is: "LET HIM SIT IN YOGA HAVING ME AS
HIS SUPREME GOAL." It has been already said in an
earlier chapter that the meditator should continue
431

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

meditation, and ere long (achirena), he will have the
fulfilment of his meditation. The same idea is suggested
here. Having made the mind tame, and keeping it away
from its own endless dissipations, we are instructed to
keep the single-pointed mind in contemplation of the
Divine Self and His Eternal Nature. Immediately
following this instruction is the order that we should
remain in this attitude of meditation, seeking nothing else
but "ME AS THE SUPREME GOAL." Ere long, in
the silence and quietude within, the withering mind and
other equipments will exhaust themselves, and the seeker
will wake up to realise his own Infinite, Eternal, Blissful
and quiet Nature, the Self.
15. Thus, always keeping the mind balanced, the YOGI, with
his mind controlled, attains to the Peace abiding in Me, which
culminates in total liberation (NIRVANA or MOKSHA) .
After thus describing the physical pose, the mental
stability and the consequent intellectual self-application,
the Lord now describes the last lap in the technique of
meditation to His beloved friend, the Pandava Prince.
When all the above details are worked out by anyone, that
individual becomes a man steadfast both in his physical
and in his subtler life, and thereby, he comes to release
from himself a large quantity of his psychic vitality. In this
stanza it is said that, when a meditator controls his mind
432

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and 'constantly' (Sada) keeps his mind away from its
agitations, he can easily and surely reach the Supreme.
The term 'always' (Sada) should not be misunderstood as
suggesting that the practitioner should live, criminally
neglecting all his duties towards his home and the world
around himself. Here the term 'always' only connotes "a
duration of constant and consistent inner silence," during
one's meditation. At the peak of meditation, the
practitioner comes to a point of perfect 'halt'.
The individual comes to experience infinite peace which is
"the peace that resides in him." The Self is Peace Absolute
(Shantam), inasmuch as the processes of physical
excitements,
mental
agitations
and
intellectual
disturbances are not in the Self, It being beyond these
matter-envelopments. Here it may look as though Krishna
is advocating the dualistic school of philosophy, since it is
said: "The meditator reaches the peace that is My own
nature." To conceive of a Truth having qualities, is to
reduce the Eternal to the finite status of a substance
(dravya). Again, if the meditator experiences "THE PEACE
THAT RESIDES IN ME," then the goal gained becomes an
'object' apart from the meditator.
The subtle philosopher, Sri Krishna, recognises
unavoidable imperfection of the spoken language,
therefore, he tries to neutralize the fallacy in
expressions by the significant terms "the Peace,
433

this
and
his
that

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ultimately culminates in the Supreme liberation" (Nirvanaparamam).
In short, when the meditator has come to the moment of
perfect silence within, he comes to experience, at first, a
peace that is unknown in the world without. Soon, as it
were, the experiencer gets slowly acted upon and digested
into the very substance of the Truth, whose fragrance was
the Peace, which the dying ego of the meditator seemed to
experience at the gateway of its own Real Divine Nature.
In fact in the last stage of fulfilment in meditation, the
meditator 'awakens' to his status of Self-hood. This Advaita
experience is the one fact that has been repeated and
emphasised all through Krishna's Song Divine.
FOLLOWING ARE THE REGULATIONS, AS REGARDS
THE MEDITATOR'S FOOD, ETC:
16. Verily, YOGA is not possible for him who eats too much,
nor for him who does not eat at all; nor for him who sleeps too
much, nor for him who is (always) awake, O Arjuna.
When the above technique and goal are so clearly given
out, one is apt to wonder at one's own incapacity to reach
anywhere near the indicated goal, in spite of the fact that
one has been sincerely and constantly meditating upon it
for a number of years. What exactly is the behaviour that
unconsciously takes a seeker away from the grand road to
success? No scientific theory is complete unless it
434

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

enumerates the various precautions that are to be taken
for achieving complete success. The next few stanzas warn
us of all the possible pitfalls on the path of the Dhyana
Yoga.
Moderation in indulgence and activities at all levels of
one's personality is an imperative requisite, which alone
can assure true success in meditation. Intemperance
would bring discordant and riotous agitations in the
various matter layers of the personality, shattering the
harmonious melody of integration. Therefore, strict
moderation in food, sleep and recreation is enjoined:
everything should be well-measured and completely
defined.
YOGA IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR HIM WHO EATS TOO
MUCH NOR FOR HIM WHO DOES NOT EAT AT ALL -- Here, the term 'eat' should be understood in its
comprehensive meaning as including all sense
enjoyments, mental feelings, and intellectual perceptions.
It is not only the process of consuming things through the
mouth; it includes the enjoyments gained through all the
avenues of sense perceptions and inward experiences.
Drawing our conclusions from these standards, we may
understand the rule to be: "Eat whatever comes to us
handy, without creating unnecessary destruction to the
living kingdom just for our personal existence, and
intelligently consume a quantity which does not load the
435

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

stomach." This is the golden rule of diet for a successful
meditator.
It is rightly said that neither 'too much sleep' --- which
unnecessarily dulls our faculties and renders the
individual more and more gross --- nor 'no sleep at all' is
the right policy for a student in spiritual life. Intelligent
moderation is the law.
THIS STANZA MIGHT CONFUSE THE DULL-WITTED,
AND THEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING VERSE
ANSWERS THE QUESTION: "HOW THEN CAN YOGA
BE ACHIEVED?"
17. YOGA becomes the destroyer of pain for him who is
moderate in eating and recreation, who is moderate in his
exertion during his actions, who is moderate in sleep and
wakefulness.
This stanza plans the life, living which, Yoga can be more
successfully cultivated. Moderation in eating and
recreation, in sleep and activities, is the prescription that
has been insisted upon for Yoga by the Lord.
In indicating the blessed life of temperance and selfcontrol, Krishna has used such a select vocabulary that the
words have the fragrance of an ampler suggestiveness. An
ordinary seeker takes to some sacred work in a misguided
belief that "selfless work" will create in him more
436

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

worthiness for his spiritual life. Many seekers have I met,
who have, in the long run, fallen a prey to their own
activities because of this false notion. In this stanza, we
have a clear direction as to how to avoid the victimization
of ourselves by the work that we undertake.
Not only must we be temperate --- discriminately careful
in choosing the right field of activity --- but we must also
see that the EFFORTS that we put into that activity are
moderate (cheshtasya). Having selected a divine work, if
we get bound and enslaved in its programme of effort, the
chances are that the work, instead of redeeming us
from our existing vasanas, will create in us more and more
new tendencies, and in the exhaustion created by the
work, we will slowly sink into agitations and, perhaps,
even into animalism.
When Krishna wants to indicate the Absolute necessity for
moderation regarding sleep and wakefulness, the phrases
which he uses are very significant. 'Swapna' is the term
used for indicating that total conscious life of the ego's
active experience in the world. Elsewhere, in the
Upanishads also, the entire life's experiences have been
classified under the 'state of sleep' (the non-apprehension
of Reality) and the 'state of dream, (the mis-apprehension
of Reality) wherein the waking state is also included.
The term Avabodha, used here, echoes the scriptural goal
explained as Absolute Knowledge. To all intelligent and
437

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

serious students of the Upanishads, the term, as used here,
carries a secret message; that the meditator should not
over-indulge either in the life of mis-apprehensions nor in
those deep silent moments of pure meditation --- the
moments of Avabodha. Krishna indicates that Sadhakas,
during their early practices, should not over-indulge in
the world of their perceptions nor try to practise
meditation for too long and weary hours and force inner
silence.
In the same stanza, by two insignificant-looking words,
Krishna has conveyed to all generations of Geeta students,
an indication why Yoga is to be practised at all. "IT IS
CAPABLE OF DESTROYING ALL MISERIES."
WHEN DOES ONE BECOME A SAINT PERFECTLY
STEADFAST (YUKTAH)?
18. When the perfectly controlled mind rests in the Self only,
free from longing for all (objects of) desire, then it is said: "he is
united" (YUKTAH) .
This and the following five stanzas are a dissertation on
the fruits of Yoga and they explain what a perfect
meditator can gain in life, and what his experiences are
while living in this world during and after his spiritual
realisation.

438

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Throughout the Geeta, so far, Krishna has been stressing
the necessity of one quality, steadfastness (yuktah). A
complete and exhaustive definition has not so far been
given to explain this crucial term, although sufficient hints
have been thrown in here and there, to indicate the nature
of the man who is steadfast in devotion and Yoga; here we
have almost a complete definition of it.
When the mind is completely under control, the stanza
claims, it "RESTS SERENELY IN THE SELF ALONE." A
little reflection can bring the truth of the statement into
our easy comprehension. An uncontrolled mind is one
which frantically gallops on, seeking satisfaction among
the sense-objects. We have already been told that the mind
can be withdrawn from its preoccupations with its usual
sense-objects, only when it is firmly tied down to the
contemplation of the Self, which is the Eternal Substratum,
the Conscious Principle that illumines all perceptions and
experiences. Naturally therefore, a mind that is fully
controlled is a mind which has lost itself, as it were, in the
steady and continuous contemplation upon the Self.
The above explanation is endorsed by the second line of
the stanza which gives us an inkling as to the means by
which we can fix our mind on the Supreme. "FREE FROM
LONGING AFTER ALL DESIRES" --- is the means that
has been suggested repeatedly throughout the Lord's
Song. It is unfortunate that hasty commentators have
unconsciously, come to over-emphasize the "renunciation
of all desires" as the cardinal virtue in Hinduism. There is
439

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

an ocean of difference between the 'DESIRES' and the
'LONGING AFTER DESIRES.' Desires in themselves are
not unhealthy, nor can they actually bring about any
sorrow unto us. But the disproportionate amount of our
clinging to our desires is the cancer of the mind that
brings about all the mortal agonies into life.
For example, desire for wealth is healthy, inasmuch as it
encourages the mind to act and to accomplish, to acquire
and to keep, to earn and to save. But when desire
POSSESSES an individual in such a way that he becomes
almost hysterical with over-anxiety, it makes him
incompetent to put forth any substantial creative effort
and accomplish glories worthy of the dignity of man.
A desire in itself cannot and does not bring about storms
in the mind, as our longing after those very same desires
does. The Geeta advises us only to renounce our
YEARNINGS for all objects of desires.
Through discrimination and proper intellectual evaluation
of the sense-objects, when an individual has withdrawn
his mind from its usual sense-gutters, the mind comes to
take hold of the subtler and the diviner theme of the Self
for its contemplation. The limited and the finite senseobjects agitate the mind, while the Unlimited and the
Infinite Self brings peace and joy into it. This condition of
sense-withdrawal and the entry of the mind into the Self is
called its condition of steadfastness (Yuktah). Such an
individual has a fully integrated (Yuktah) personality.
440

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SUCH A YOGIN'S INTEGRATED MIND IS DESCRIBED
BELOW:
19. " As a lamp placed in a windless place does not flicker" --- is
a simile used to describe the YOGI of controlled-mind,
practising YOGA of the Self (or absorbed in th e YOGA -ofthe-Self) .
As an efficient complement to the previous verse, this
stanza explains the mind of the Yogi of collected thoughts,
who is absorbed in Yoga. This explanation is given
through the help of a famous simile: "as a lamp in a spot
sheltered from the wind does not flicker." The example is
quite appropriate inasmuch as the mind is fickle and
unsteady as the tip of a flame. Thoughts appear in the
mind every second, in a continuous stream, and these
constant thought disturbances --- each dying, yielding its
place to a new one --- give us the apprehension of a solid
factor called the mind. Similarly, the tip of a flame also, (it
can be experimentally proved) is never steady, but the
flickering is so fast, that it gives us an illusion of a definite
shape and solidity.
When this flame is well protected from the fickle breeze, it
becomes steady in its upward flight. In the same fashion
the flame of the mind, flickering at the whims and fancies
of the passing sensuous desires, when arrested in
meditation, becomes steadily brilliant although its
thoughts are employed in the contemplation of the Self by
441

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

a constant flow of Brahmakara Vritti. In short, repeated and
constant thoughts of Brahman --- Vast and Infinite, Eternal
and Blissful, the Substratum for the entire Universe --- is
the "Yoga of the Self (Yogam atmanah).
HAVING THUS, THROUGH MEDITATION, BECOME
SINGLE-POINTED, WHAT WOULD BE THE STAGES OF
PROGRESS ACCOMPLISHED? THIS IS DESCRIBED IN
THE FOLLOWING FOUR STANZAS:
20. When the mind, restrained by the practice of YOGA, attains
quietude and when seeing the Self by the self, he is satisfied in
his own Self;
21. When he (the YOGI ) feels that Infinite bliss --- which can
be grasped by the (pure) intellect and which transcends the
senses --- wherein established he never moves from the Reality;
22. Which, having obtained, he thinks there is no other gain
superior to it; wherein established, he is not moved even by
heavy sorrow.
23. Let it be known: the severance from the union-with-pain is
YOGA. This YOGA should be practised with determination
and with a mind steady and undespairing.
These four verses together give a complete picture of the
state of Yoga and Krishna ends with a very powerful call
to man that everyone should practise this Yoga of
442

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Meditation and self-development. In order to encourage
man and make him walk this noble path of selfdevelopment and self-mastery, Bhagawan explains the
goal which is gained by the meditator. When the mind is
completely restrained, as explained in the above four
stanzas, it attains a serene quietude and in that silence
gains the experience of the Self, not as anything separate
from itself, but as its own true nature.
This self-rediscovery of the mind, that is in fact nothing
other than the Divine Conscious Principle, is the State of
Infinite Bliss. This awakening to the cognition of the Self
can take place only when the individual ego has smashed
its limiting adjuncts and has thereby transcended its
identifications with the body, mind and intellect.
That this bliss is not an objective experience such as is
gained among the pleasures of the world, is evident by the
qualification that it "transcends the senses" (Ati-indriyah).
Ordinarily we gain our experiences in the world outside
through our sense-organs. When the spiritual masters
promise that Self-Realisation is a State of Bliss, we are
tempted to accept it as an objective goal, but when they
say that it is beyond the senses, the seekers start feeling
that the promises of religion are mere bluff. The stanza,
therefore, has to clearly insist that this Bliss of Selfrecognition is perceivable only through the pure intellect.
A doubt may now arise that when, as a result of these
almost super-human efforts, an individual has at last,
443

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

come to experience this transcendental Bliss, it may
provide only a flashy moment of intense living, which
may then disappear, demanding, all over again, similar
super-human efforts to regain one more similar moment
of
Bliss-experience.
To
remove
this
possible
misunderstanding, the stanza insists: "ESTABLISHED
WHEREIN, HE NEVER DEPARTS FROM HIS REAL
STATE." The Geeta repeatedly endorses that the
experience of the Self is an enduring state from which
there is no return.
Even supposing one has gained this Infinite Bliss, will he
not again come to all the sorrows that are natural to every
worldly being? Will he not thereafter feel as great an urge
as anyone else to strive and struggle, to earn and hoard,
and thirst to love and be loved, etc.? All these excitements
which are carbuncles upon the shoulders of an imperfect
man, are denied to a perfect one, as the following stanza
(VI-22) explains the Supreme Truth as "HAVING COME
TO WHICH NO ONE CAN CONSIDER ANY OTHER
GAIN AS EQUAL TO IT, MUCH LESS EVER
ANYTHING GREATER."
Even after these explanations the Lord Himself raises the
question which a man of doubts may entertain. It will be
quite natural for a student, who is striving to understand
Vedanta purely through his intellect, to doubt as to
whether the experience of Divinity can be maintained,
even during moments of stress and sorrow and in periods
of misery and mourning. In other words: is not religion a
444

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mere luxury of the rich and the powerful, a superstitious
satisfaction for the weak, a make-believe dream-heaven
for the escapist? Can religion and its promised perfection
stand unperturbed in all our challenges of life:
bereavements, losses, illness, penury, starvation? This
doubt --- which is quite common in our times too --- has
been unequivocally answered here with a daring
statement that "WHEREIN BEING ESTABLISHED ONE IS
NOT MOVED EVEN BY THE HEAVIEST SORROW."
To summarise: when by the quietude of the mind, gained
through concentration, one comes to rediscover one's own
Self, his is the Bliss Absolute, which cannot be perceived
through the senses and yet, can be lived, through a 'pure
intellect,' and having reached which there is no more any
return; having gained which there is no greater gain to
strive for; and which is not shaken even by the lashings of
the greatest tragedies of our existence. This is the
wondrous Truth that has been indicated as the Self by the
Geeta, the goal of all men of discrimination and spiritual
aspirations.
This Self is to be known. The means of knowing this goal,
as well as the state of its experience, is called "Yoga" in the
Geeta. (VI --- 23). Here we have one of the noblest, if
revolutionary, definitions of Yoga.
We have explained earlier how the Geeta is an
incomparable re-statement of the declaration of the
Upanishads, in the context of the Hindu-world available at
445

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the time of the Mahabharata. The old idea that Yoga is a
strange phenomenon, too difficult for the ordinary man to
practise or to come to experience, has been remodelled
here to a more tolerant and all-comprehensive definition.
Yoga, which was till then a technique of religious selfperfection available only for a reserved few, has now been
made a public park into which everyone can enter at his
free will and entertain himself as best he can. In this sense
of the term, the Geeta has been rightly called a
revolutionary Bible of the Hindu Renaissance.
Apart from the divine prerogative of one who is an
incarnation, we find a brilliant dash of revolutionary zeal
in Krishna's Godly personality both in His emotions and
His actions. When such a divine revolutionary enters the
fields of culture and spirituality, He could not have given
a more spectacular definition of Yoga than that which He
has given us here: "Yoga --- a state of disunion from every
union-with-pain." This re-interpretation of Yoga not only
provides us with a striking definition but at the same time,
it is couched in such a clapping language of contradiction
that it arrests the attention of every student and makes
him think for himself.
The term "Yoga" means "contact." To-day, man in his
imperfection has contacts with only the world of finite
objects and therefore, he ekes out of life only finite joys.
These objects of the world are contacted through the
instruments of man's body, mind and intellect. Joy ended
446

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

is the birth of sorrow. Therefore, life through the matter
vestures is the life of pain-Yoga (dukha samyoga).
Detachment from this pain --- Yoga is naturally a process
in which we disconnect (Viyoga) ourselves from the fields
of objects and their experiences. A total or even a partial
divorce from the perceptions of the world of objects is not
possible, as long as we are using the mechanism of
perception, the organ of feeling, and the instrument of
thinking. To get detached from the mechanism of
perceptions, feelings and thoughts, would naturally be the
total detachment from the pain-Yoga --- (Dukha-SamyogaViyoga).
Existence of the mind is possible only through its
attachment; the mind can never live without attaching
itself to some object or other. Detachment from one object
is possible for the mind only when it has attached itself to
another. For the mind, detachment from pain caused by
the unreal is possible only when it gets attached to the
Bliss, that is the Nature of the Real. In this sense, the true
Yoga --- which is the seeking and establishing an enduring
attachment with the Real --- is gained only when the
seeker cries a halt in his onward march towards pain, and
deliberately takes a 'right-about-turn' to proceed towards
the Real and the Permanent in himself. This wonderful
idea has been most expressively brought out in the phrase
which Bhagawan employs here, as a definition of Yoga --(Dukha-Samyoga-Viyoga).
447

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

A little scrutiny will enable us to realise that in defining
Yoga thus, Sri Krishna has not introduced any new
ideology into the stock of knowledge that was the
traditional wealth of the Hindu scriptures. Till then, Yoga
was emphasized from the standpoint of its goal, rather
than from the exploration of its means. This overemphasis of the goal had frightened the faithful followers
away from its salutory blessings. And the technique of
Yoga had sunk to become a mysterious and a very secret
practice meant only for a few.
This Yoga is to be practised, insists Krishna, with "AN
EAGER AND DECISIVE MIND." To practise with firm
resolve and an undespairing heart is the simple secret for
the highest success in the practice of meditation, as the
"Yoga with the Truth" is gained through a total successful
"Viyoga from the false."
If we feel uncomfortably warm by being very near the
fire-place we have only to move away from it to reach the
cool and comforting atmosphere. Similarly, if, to live
among the finite objects and live its limited joys is sorrow,
then
to get away from them is to enter into the Realm of Bliss
which is the Self. This is "Yoga."
FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING YOGA ARE
NOW CONTINUED AFTER THE ABOVE SHORT
DIGRESSION. MOREOVER:
448

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

24. Abandoning without reserve all desires born of
SANKALPA, and completely restraining the whole group of
senses by the mind from all sides.
25. Little by little, let him attain quietude by his intellect, held
firm; having made the mind established in the Self, let him not
think of anything.
In the previous section the entire goal of Yoga was
indicated as that state "WHEREIN THE MIND,
THROUGH THE PRACTICE OF CONCENTRATION,
COMES TO GET ITSELF ABSOLUTELY RESTRAINED."
Later on, we have been given a glorious word-picture of
the state of enjoyment and perfection that one will get
introduced into, in this state of meditation. This
theoretical exposition has no practical value unless
exhaustive instructions are given, as to how a diligent
seeker can bring about this total mental poise, consciously,
in a deliberate spiritual act of perfect self-control.
In these two brilliant stanzas the subtle art of meditation
has been explained. The secrets of how to bring the mind
to single-pointedness, and what to do thereafter with that
mind in concentration and how to approach the Truth and
ultimately realise It in an act of deliberate and conscious
becoming --- are all exhaustively indicated in these two
significant stanzas.

449

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Renouncing 'all' (Sarvan) desires 'fully' (Asheshatah) by the
mind, control all the sense-organs from their entire world
of sense-objects. Herein, every word demands a
commentary, since every phrase leaves a hint which is so
important in ultimately assuring the seeker a complete
success. It is not only sufficient that ALL desires are
renounced, but each desire must be TOTALLY eradicated.
By these two terms (Sarvan and Asheshatah), no trace of
doubt is left in the mind of the seekers, as to the condition
of their mental equipoise, during moments of higher
meditation. The term Asheshatah means that even the
desire for this perfection in "Yoga" is to be, in the end,
totally renounced!
"Renunciation of desire" is advised here as a very
necessary and important qualification; but unfortunately,
the unintelligent ignored this significant qualification, and
perverted our sacred religion by acting and behaving as
though it recommended a life of indolence with neither
any ambition to achieve, nor any desire to accomplish.
The term "BORN OF SANKALPA" is a very significant
term qualifying the desires that are to be renounced totally
and fully. The term 'Sankalpa' has already been explained
earlier (VI-2) --- so here the terms used mean that it is "the
renunciation of all agitation-breeding desires."
When once this renunciation of disturbing desires has
been accomplished, the individual's mind gains strength
and stamina to assert itself, at first to make the wild horses
of the sense-organs tame so that they run under greater
450

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

control and then to restrain all the sense-organs from all
sense-objects from all sides.
It is scientifically very true that our mind is not able to
control our sense-organs, for it has been rendered weak
and thoroughly impotent due to the permanent agitations
caused by its own false desires. Once the mind gets strong,
as a result of its conquest over desires, it discovers in itself
all the strength and capacity to control the Indriyas from
all sides. This process of quietening the mind can never be
accomplished by any hasty action or by any imagination,
or by any strange and mysterious method. It is clearly
indicated by the very insistence that the Geeta makes in
this stanza, that the seeker should "ATTAIN QUIETUDE
AS A RESULT OF HIS WITHDRAWAL FROM THE
WORLD OF SENSE-OBJECTS, BY DEGREES." Slowly,
slowly (Shanaih-Shanaih), the mind gains more and more
quietude.
No doubt, when the sense-organs have stopped their mad
onrush to their respective sense-objects, a certain amount
of mental quietude is gained. The methods of intensifying
this inner peace have been indicated in this stanza.
"PATIENTLY, WITH THE INTELLECT THE MIND IS TO
BE
CONTROLLED,
AND
RESTED
IN
THE
CONTEMPLATION OF THE SELF." This advice is
extremely important to every seeker as it gives the next
item of the programme for a meditator, when he has
accomplished, through the exertion of the mind during his
451

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

meditation, a total withdrawal of himself from the senseworld. A total rejection of the sense-world is possible only
during meditation.
The mind that is thus brought to a relative quietude is
next to be controlled by the still subtler personality layer
in the meditator, which is his intellect. Just as the senseorgans are controlled and restrained by the mind, the
mind is now treated by the discriminating intellect and
brought under complete restraint. The mind cannot be
restrained except by fixing its entire attention on one idea
to the total exclusion of all other ideas. The mind is
"THOUGHT-FLOW" and as such, the constant thought of
the Nature of the Self, is to be the exercise by which the
mind should be restrained by the intellect. A mind that
has merged in the steady contemplation of the Self
becomes still, and a divine quietude comes to pervade its
very substance. This is the last lap of the journey to which
deliberate and conscious action (Purushartha) can take any
seeker.
Krishna's exhaustive theory, which can be practised by
any sincere devotee, concludes in these two stanzas with a
warning as to what the seeker should avoid at his moment
of inward silence and peace; the Lord does not instruct the
seeker here on what he should positively do. The Divine
Flute-player says, "LET HIM NOT THINK OF
ANYTHING," when he has once reached this state of
peace within.
452

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

After the "halt-moment" there is nothing more for the
seeker to act and achieve. All that he has to do is to avoid
starting any new line of imagination. "UNDISTURBED BY
ANY NEW THOUGHT WAVE, LET HIM MAINTAIN
HIS INNER SILENCE AND COME TO LIVE IT MORE
AND MORE DEEPLY," is all the instruction that the
technique of meditation gives to the meditator. "Knock
and thou shalt enter" is the promise; you have 'knocked,'
and into the Supreme Presence, thou shalt enter... ere long
(Achirena).
No two simple looking stanzas, anywhere in the spiritual
literature of the world, including the sacred books in
Hinduism, can claim to have given such an exhaustive
wealth of useful instructions to a seeker, as these two
stanzas in the Geeta. Even in the entire bulk of the Divine
Song (Geeta) itself, there is no other similar couple of
stanzas which can, in their pregnant import, stand a
favourable comparison with this perfect pair.
AS AN INSTRUCTION TO THOSE WHO HAVE A
FICKLE, UNSTEADY MIND, THE FOLLOWING IS
ADDED:
26. From whatever cause the restless and the unsteady mind
wanders away, from that let him restrain it, and bring it back
under the control of the Self alone.

453

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Every student who tries to understand the above two
verses and tries to put them into practice will despair at
his own incapacity to control the mind and fix it
constantly in the contemplation of the Self. In utter
despair, every seeker will realise that the mind irresistibly
wanders away from its point-of-concentration because the
mind is, by its very nature, "restless" (Chanchala) and
"unsteady" (A-sthira). It can neither constantly think of one
object nor consistently think of different objects. By these
two terms qualifying the mind --- restlessness and
unsteadiness --- Krishna has brought out a vivid and a
very realistic picture of the mind, as it is experienced by
all true seekers striving on the path of Meditation. These
two phrases are so impressive that later on Arjuna
himself, while crystallising his doubts into language, uses
them quite naturally.
Thus, during practice, even though the seeker has brought
his sense-organs to a large extent under his control, still
the mind, disturbed by the memories of its past
experiences, will shoot out in search of sense-objects.
These are the moments of dejection and despair for the
seekers. These wanderings of the mind may be due to
very many reasons: the memory of the past, the vicinity of
some tempting objects, the association of ideas, some
attachment or aversion, or maybe, even the very spiritual
aspiration of the seeker. Lord Krishna's instruction here is
very categorical and all-embracing. He says "WHATEVER
BE THE REASON BECAUSE OF WHICH THE RESTLESS
AND THE UNSTEADY MIND WANDERS AWAY," the
454

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

seeker is not to despair, but should understand that it is
the nature of the mind to wander, and that the very
process of meditation is only a technique to stop this
wandering.
LET HIM BRING IT BACK --- The seeker is advised to
bring back the mind that has rushed out into dissimilar
channels of thinking. This withdrawal of the mind by
sheer will-power may be successful to a degree, but as
soon as it is brought back, it will, and it should, rush out
again into another fanciful line of thinking. Very rarely do
the Sadhakas realise that the mind means "the flow-ofthought." A steady, motionless mind is no mind at all!
Therefore, in the technique of meditation, when the mind
is withdrawn from the sense-objects, this very process of
withdrawal is to be completed by a conscious effort on the
part of the meditator, in applying the same mind, at once,
in the contemplation of the Self. This idea has been
remarkably well brought out when the Lord complements
his instruction by the term "BRINGING IT UNDER THE
SWAY OF THE SELF ALONE."
THE FOLLOWING FEW STANZAS EXPLAIN THE
EFFECT OF THE 'YOGA' OF MEDITATION UPON ITS
TRUE PRACTITIONERS:
27. Supreme Bliss verily comes to this YOGI, whose mind is
quite peaceful, whose passion is quietened, who is free from sin,
and who has become BRAHMAN.
455

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

As we have just indicated in the previous stanza, when an
individual's mind has been arrested from its agitated
roamings in the world-of-objects, and fixed consistently
upon the Self, by degrees the mind gathers more and more
quietude and ultimately, when the flow of thoughts
ceases, the mind also ends. Where the mind has ended,
there the individual is awakened to the experience of the
Infinite Nature of the Self. Naturally, the Meditator (Yogin)
"COMES TO THE SUPREME BLISS."
An intelligent enquirer has every right to question this
assertion; for, in a true science, the scientist has no right to
assert his own opinion and to expect the students to
swallow it. In the second line of the verse, the reasons are
given to show how and why the quietened mind becomes
an open-window through which the prospect of the Self
comes to our view. A mind, thus held steadily in the inner
atmosphere of thrilled silence, comes to drop off all its
previous vasanas; the mind gets "FREED FROM TAINT"
(A-kalmasham).
In Vedanta, technically the "impurities" of the mind are
called mala, and it is considered as constituted of
"SPIRITUAL NON-APPREHENSION" and the consequent
"MENTAL AGITATIONS." The "veiling power" (Avarana)
generated by the inertia of the intellect (Tamas), creates in
its wake the disturbing "agitations" (Vikshepa) in the
mental zone. The agitation-nuisance in the mind is most
prominent when it is under the influence of Rajo-guna.
This Vedantic theory, explaining "the fall of man" into
456

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sorrow, is fully echoed in the words of the Lord here: (a)
"passions quietened" (Shanta-rajasam) and (b) "freed from
taint" (A-kalmasham).
An individual in whom all "agitations" have ceased, and
consequently, who has become perfectly freed from his
"ignorance" of the Reality, should naturally be considered
as one who has regained his "Knowledge of the Self." As
long as there is agitation, so long there is the mind; and
the Self identified with the mind, is the ego --- the seeker
who started meditating. When, as it has been explained,
the meditator has exposed his mind to the atmosphere of
inner peace and quietude, he comes to end completely all
his mental agitations, and therefore, the ego rediscovers
itself to be nothing other than the Self. This non-dualTruth has been openly declared by the Lord through His
brilliant phrase "Brahman-become" (Brahma-bhootam) in
describing the man of Self-realisation.
HAVING THUS EXPLAINED THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF
A TRUE MEDITATOR THE LORD EXPLAINS HOW
THIS EXPERIENCE OF THE SELF CAN BE,
THEREAFTER, THE CONSTANT LIFE OF THE PERFECT
ONE:
28. The YOGI engaging the mind thus (in the practice of
YOGA ) , freed from sins, easily enjoys the Infinite Bliss of
'BRAHMAN -contact. '
457

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Engaging himself thus in the battle for evolution and
inward mastery, a meditator steadily grows out of the
shadowy regions of his own spiritual ignorance and
imperfections, to smile forth in luxurious extravagance
into the sparkling sunshine of Knowledge. When the
meditator keeps his mind undisturbed in the roaring
silence within, in the white-heat of meditation, his mind
gets purified, like a piece of iron in the smithy furnace. In
short, as we said earlier, and elsewhere, the "halt-moment"
is the frontier-line upto which human-effort can raise the
mind. There it ends itself just as a balloon, as it goes
higher and higher, blasts itself in the rarified atmosphere
of higher altitudes, and drops down, merging the balloonspace with the space outside. Similarly, the mind too, at
the pinnacle of meditation, shatters itself, drops the ego
down and merges with the Supreme. Just as the space in
the balloon automatically merges with the space outside
when it has exploded, so too, when the finite mind is
ended, "WITH EASE IT ATTAINS THE INFINITE BLISS
ARISING OUT OF ITS CONTACT-WITH-BRAHMAN."
Krishna is here trying to make an agitated, restless,
inquisitive intellect understand that positive and dynamic
Reality, which can and shall be gained when the mind and
intellect are transcended. Had he said 'THE SEEKER
WILL BECOME HAPPINESS,' Arjuna would have
hesitated to accept it, believing that in the Self there is no
positive joy. To make his unprepared intellect perceive the
experienceable joy of the Infinite, the Divine Cowherd has
to borrow a vivid phrase from ordinary life and so he says
458

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

that the meditator "ATTAINS THE INFINITE BLISS
THROUGH THE BRAHMAN-CONTACT." This phrase
"Brahman-contact" should be understood as "Self-contact" -- in contrast to the finite joys which we ordinarily gain in
life through the "not-Self-contact."
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS WE GET A
DESCRIPTION OF THE EFFECTS OF YOGA AND THE
CONSEQUENT PERCEPTION OF ONENESS IN THE
PLURALISTIC WORLD:
29. With the mind harmonised by YOGA he sees the Self
abiding in all beings, and all beings in the Self; he sees the same
everywhere.
All religions in the world are great, but indeed, none of
them is so perfect as the religion of Vedanta, if by religion
we mean the "Science of Self-perfection". In this stanza, the
author of the Geeta says, in unequivocal terms, that the
perfect man of Self-knowledge or God-realisation is not
merely one who has realised his own divinity, but is also
one who has equally understood and has come to live in
an intimate knowledge and experience of the divinity
inherent in all creatures, without any distinction
whatsoever. The Awareness in us is the Awareness
everywhere in all names and forms and this Divine
Awareness is the very essence in the entire world of
perceptions and experience. To contact the Infinite in us, is
to contact the Eternal everywhere.
459

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

To a true man of realisation, in Hinduism, there is no
more a world to be addressed, even be it in divine
compassion, by the disgusting phrase: "O! Ye Children of
Sin!" Rama Tirtha, a Hindu Saint of Perfection, could not
but address the entire living kingdom as "O! Children of
Light!" This idea of the consummate revelation of "God-I
am" gained by the meditator is the Peak of Perfection
endorsed and aimed at by the Hindu Seers. This idea has
been most effectively brought out in this stanza.
That this pluralistic phenomenon is a manifestation of and
a projection upon the Immortal Truth is very well brought
out in almost all the Geeta chapters. The essence in all
names and forms, thus, is the same transcendental Self.
Just as the mud in all mud-pots, the gold in all gold
ornaments, the ocean in all waves, the electricity in all
bulbs, the Self is the Essence in and the Substratum for the
entire world of objects.
From the physical body we perceive the physical world,
and from our emotional level we perceive the emotions in
others. So too, from our intellectual level alone, can we
intelligently contact the ideas in other intellects. As
asserted in the previous chapter, when an individual
transcends his intellect, he rediscovers his own Divine
Nature, and from that Spiritual Centre, when he looks out,
he finds the Self pervading everywhere. The meditator, on
transcending his intellect, becomes the Self; and to the Self
there is nothing but the Self everywhere. To the mud,
460

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

there are no pots; to the gold, there are no ornaments
separate from itself.
With this understanding in our mind, the stanza becomes
quite clear when it says: "HE BEHOLDS THE SELF IN
ALL BEINGS AND EQUALLY BEHOLDS ALL BEINGS
IN THE SELF." Such a Perfect One, who has realised the
Unity in the world of diversity, alone can afford to
entertain the equality of vision in all circumstances and
conditions --- "on a noble Brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a
dog and a Pariah" (V-18).
NOW WILL BE DESCRIBED THE EFFECT OF THIS
PERCEPTION OF UNITY OF THE SELF:
30. He who sees Me everywhere, and sees everything in Me, he
never gets separated from Me, nor do I get separated from him.
Earlier we were told that on reaching his goal, the
meditator "ATTAINS INFINITE BLISS OF THE
'BRAHMAN'-CONTACT" (V-28). We explained that the
term 'contact' indicates only the non-dual Reality, which is
the theme of all the Upanishads. Here, in this stanza, we
have Krishna's own commentary upon that term. Once
having awakened to the Self, the Perfect Master thereafter
recognises everywhere nothing but the Self.
HE WHO SEES ME IN ALL THINGS AND SEES ALL
THINGS IN ME --- In this stanza, as everywhere else, the
461

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

first person singular 'I' and 'Me' are to be understood as
the Self. To one who is re-reading the stanza in the light of
this annotation, this and the previous stanza together
express more fully the pregnant meaning of the most
famous Upanishadic declarations found in the Ishavasya.
HE NEVER BECOMES SEPARATED FROM ME --- On
transcending the intellect, the experience of the ego is not
that it sees or perceives or cognises the Eternal but that it
discovers itself in essence to be nothing but the Self
(Shivoham). The dreamer, on awakening, himself becomes
the waker; a dreamer can never see or recognise the waker
as separate from himself.
NOR DO I BECOME SEPARATE FROM HIM --- The
dualists are rather hesitant to accept that Infinite Divinity
is their Real Nature, for they are, as ego-centres, conscious
of their own bodily vanities and sins. In no clearer terms
can we more exhaustively describe the unadulterated
Truth of the Essential Divinity in man. Lord Krishna here,
is in no way trying to conceal His meaning that a
meditator, when he has fulfilled the process of
detachment from the not-Self, himself BECOMES the
Eternal and the Infinite. It may be a staggering truth, but
all the same it is The Truth. Those who are hesitating and
wavering may well continue to disbelieve their own
divine potentialities. But the intimate experience of the
long hierarchy of Gurus in India and the mystic Saints all
over the world has endorsed this unbelievable, yet plain
462

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Truth that, "the Self in an individual is the same Self
everywhere."
At present we are divorced from ourselves; the ego is a
rebel who has exiled himself from his native kingdom, the
Self. On rediscovery of the Self, the ego BECOMES the Self
in such a happy blending that thereafter there is no
distinction between the ego and the Self. On awakening,
the dreamer becomes the waker; not only does the
dreamer become the waker, but the waker can never
remain separate from the dreamer. In ordinary divorces
either party can divorce the other, and yet maintain an
emotional relationship with each other. Here the Lord
says, not only does the seeker come to feel the Self-hood,
but I, the Self, become homogeneously one with him.
In fact, once we understand that "Misguided God is a
man," it becomes amply clear that, rightly guided, a man
rediscovers himself to be nothing other than the Supreme.
An actor playing the part of a beggar, is not really a
beggar; the moment he drops the part he is playing, he
becomes what in fact he is. In fact, even while he was
playing his role, he was not a beggar. This daring
declaration of Vedanta is not at all difficult to understand,
but the deluded are aghast at this revelation, and in their
imperfections, refuse to believe this Truth. They have not
the guts to take the responsibilities of living a Godly life.
Krishna's courageous statement in this stanza leaves not
even a pin-hole of a doubt on this sacred conclusion of all
463

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the scriptures of the world, especially that of the immortal
Upanishads.
EMPHASISING THE IDEA THAT THE MAN OF
PERFECT SELF-CONTROL AND MEDITATION, ON
REALISING THE SELF "BECOMES THE SELF," THE
FOLLOWING IS ADDED:
31. He who, being established in unity, worships Me, dwelling
in all beings, that YOGI abides in Me, whatever be his mode of
living.
The meditator who has integrated himself in a singlepointedness, steadily contemplates (Bhajati) upon Me, the
Self, which is the essential Spark-of-Life in all forms in the
world. Such an individual, whatever be his activities in
the external world, ever lives in 'Me' through a conscious
awareness of the Self. This stanza is given here mainly to
indicate that the Man-of-realisation need not necessarily
retire to some secret cave in some forgotten valley of the
Himalayas, but can maintain his Divine Consciousness in
all states of existence, in all conditions of life, and under
all happy or unhappy circumstances. When a man is ill, he
has to withdraw himself from the fields of activities,
strains, and exhausting recreations, and go to a
sanatorium to recuperate. Having regained his natural
health, he need not thereafter live forever in the
sanatorium. On the other hand, he should come back to
464

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

his old fields of work and live, perhaps a more active life
than ever before.
Similarly, a disintegrated man of unhealthy temperament
is, in spiritual life, treated through meditation, and when
he regains his Godly strength and vitality, he can certainly
re-enter the fields of his earlier activity, and yet maintain
in himself the cultural perfection and spiritual knowledge
that he has gained during his spiritual treatment.
Work, in fact, can be performed and really enduring fruits
be gained, only when the worker is established in the Self.
The message of the Geeta is that dedicated work is a
means of self-development.
There is a deeper significance in the fact that Krishna, the
Perfect, is exposing Himself, perhaps, more to the dangers
of the battle than Prince Arjuna himself. A charioteer
meets the arrows earlier than the warrior who stands
behind him! Entering the battlefield, armed with nothing
but His irresistible smile, He, in effect, almost becomes the
Lord of the battle-field, wherein the entire war, as it were,
comes to revolve round Him, the central personality. This
means that a Man-of-realisation will in all conditions be
able to enter into any activity, and still maintain in himself
the unbroken Awareness of the Divine that he is.
While reading this commentary, some students might feel
that we are, in our over-enthusiasm, reading a bit too
much into the stanza. We can only request them to ponder
465

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

over the comprehensiveness of the words used in the
daring statement: "whatever his mode of life be" (Sarvathavartamanopi) the meditator (Yogin)" abides in Me."
32. He who, through the likeness (sameness) of the Self, O
Arjuna, sees equality everywhere, be it pleasure or pain, he is
regarded as the highest YOGI.
True meditators, well-established in their intellectual
understanding and spiritual experience, intuitively
recognise the Divine Presence immanent in everything.
Such Men of Perfection see in all activities the glory of the
Self and understand their own bodily functions as nothing
but the Grace of the Self. For them, there is no experience
but of the Divine. Everything experienced in the gross
world outside, and in the subtle realm within, is nothing
but an emanation from the Eternal Self.
The highest Yogi, according to the Geeta, is one who feels
the pains and joys of others as intimately as if they were
his own. The famous ethical rule: "Do unto others as you
would have them do unto you" is a most unpleasant
instruction to the average man, because, in his selfishness,
he is easily tempted to ask why he should consider others
as himself. The uninitiated, in his instinctive selfishness,
would naturally be tempted to follow the unethical ways
of life.

466

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The previous few stanzas explained why one should love
one's neighbours. The Yogi, after his experience of the Self,
comes to recognise the whole world as nothing but
himself. As all the limbs and parts of one's body are
equally dear to an individual, one can easily experience
one's intimate identity with all the different parts of the
body. If your tongue were to be accidentally bitten by
your own teeth, you would never think of punishing the
teeth for the crime they had done, for, both IN the tongue
and IN the teeth you pervade equally. Having realised the
Self, when I come to feel everywhere the presence of Me
as the Self, the whole Universe of names and forms
becomes for Me the one integrated form, in which at all
places and at all times, "I alone AM."
Such an individual, who has in his realisation come to feel
the entire universe as his own form, is called a true Yogi
by the Singer of this Celestial Song. In short, a Seer of Selfrealisation instinctively becomes a divinely compassionate
man, producing in society more than what he consumes,
and creating in the community much more than what he
destroys during his lifetime. Love is his very breath,
kindness his very sustenance.
In thus concluding the description of a perfect Yogi, with a
word-picture of the perfect man's attitude to life, and his
relationship with the world outside, Krishna would
fascinate any eagerly listening student; but Arjuna, a
practical man-of-the-world, immediately discovers his
467

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

incapacity to attain the goal pointed out here, and raises
his own doubts, in the form of a question.
SEEING THAT THE YOGA DESCRIBED --- THE YOGA
OF RIGHT KNOWLEDGE --- IS VERY DIFFICULT TO
ATTAIN, ARJUNA WISHES TO KNOW THE SUREST
MEANS OF GAINING THIS YOGA.
Arjuna said: 33. This YOGA of Equanimity, taught by Thee, O
slayer of Madhu, I see not its enduring continuity, because of
the restlessness (of the mind) .
The most practical-minded Aryan that he was, Arjuna, the
man of action, could not at all be moved merely by the
poetic beauty of an ideology. He was thirsty to live, and
therefore, the philosophy of meditation and successful
victory over the cravings of the flesh could not charm him
away to any idle intellectual pursuit. He shot some very
relevant questions to explode the seemingly impractical
philosophy that had been explained in this chapter.
'DETACHMENT
FROM
PAIN-ATTACHMENTS'
(Duhkhah-samyoga-viyoga) was the definition of "Yoga" that
Krishna provided in this chapter. The process of achieving
success in this "detachment-Yoga" has been explained
herein as the technique of withdrawing the mind from the
objects by lifting it to the planes of higher contemplation.
The theory is that mind, when it comes to a single-pointed
devotion in the contemplation of the Self, becomes stilled
468

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and redeems itself by ending its ego-centric pilgrimage
through the ignorance of Truth, and the consequent misjudgement of the world.
The goal pointed out --- perfect equanimity in all
conditions, challenges, and circumstances of life --- is an
admirable gain, but the technique seems to Arjuna to be
sheer poetic fantasy, with no roots in the soil of the
actualities of life. The acute intellect of Arjuna,
systematically approaching the Science of Self-realisation,
discovers as it were, a dangerous missing-link in the chain
of its arguments. Mercilessly, the man-of-war is
hammering at this weak point, with the absolute
confidence that he will immediately expose the
hollowness of Krishna's philosophy.
Thus, Arjuna tauntingly points out: "THIS YOGA WHICH
YOU HAVE BEEN TEACHING ME, WITH SUCH
MENTAL TRANQUILLITY, IS NOT AT ALL
PRACTICABLE." The argument given out by Arjuna and
the daring with which he directly faces his teacher, show
the characteristic spirit of a true student of Vedanta. Blind
faith can gain no entry into the fields of pure spirituality.
The teachers are to answer and clear all the doubts of the
seekers. But, in questioning the philosophy expounded by
a teacher, the student must indicate the logical arguments
by which he had come to feel the particular weakness in
that philosophy. Here, Arjuna gives all his arguments, to
show why the state of evenness of mind would remain
469

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

only a dream, as long as the human mind was, by its very
nature, 'restless' in its own agitations.
In contradicting the Krishna-philosophy, Arjuna is
extremely careful. He does not say that mental equanimity
cannot at all be gained through meditation, but his doubt
is, that it cannot be an experience of "LONG
ENDURANCE." The implication is that, even if after years
of practice the mind were to be won over, the experience
of the Self can only be momentary, and although a full
'experience' of the Infinite can be had in that splitmoment, that direct realisation could not be maintained
by the Man of Knowledge for any length of time, the
mind, being by its very nature, ever restless.
AS IF MAKING HIMSELF MORE CLEAR TO HIS
TEACHER, ARJUNA ADDS THE FOLLOWING STANZA
WHICH, IN FACT, TAKES THE EDGE OFF FROM THE
SPEARHEAD OF HIS LOGIC IN THE PREVIOUS
STANZA:
34. The mind verily is, O Krishna, restless, turbulent, strong
and unyielding; I deem it quite as difficult to control as the
wind.
There is an ocean of difference between a modern man
condemning the sacred scriptures of our land, and a true
seeker questioning the same philosophy, in his honest
attempt to understand the full import, the wealth of
470

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

suggestiveness contained therein. In his acute awareness,
Arjuna realises, deep within himself, his own subjective
experience that a mind cannot be stilled --- "as it is ever
TURBULENT, STRONG and UNYIELDING."
These three terms are quite pregnant in their own import.
Turbulence shows not only the speed in the flow of
thoughts but also their restlessness and agitations, causing
undulating waves rising on the surface. Not only does the
flood of thoughts flow fast and rough, but having reached
its destination at some sense-object or the other, it gets so
powerfully attached to it, that it becomes strong in its new
roots. Mind in turbulence is, no doubt, difficult to arrest;
when it gets strongly rivetted, it is difficult to pluck it
away from its attachments. And the third characteristic
feature of the mind is that, when it has flown into any new
channel of its own choice, for the moment, it is
"unyielding"; and so it is impossible for the individual to
pull it back from its flight and persuade it to stay at any
chosen point-of-concentration. It is to be remembered that
this was the technique advised by Krishna for the practice
of meditation earlier in this chapter (VI-26).
The strength and vigour, the vivacity and treachery, the
penetrativeness and all-pervasiveness of the mind, cannot
be better expressed than by the simile given here "AS THE
WIND." In raising this question, Arjuna is asking Krishna
for some practical tips by which he can gain perfect
control over the stormy nature of "the unyielding, strong,
turbulent and restless mind." Herein, unlike the previous
471

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

stanza, the Lord is addressed by His most familiar name
'Krishna'; a word that comes from the root Krisha --- " to
scrape." The term "Krishna" is applicable to the Self
because, on realisation
of the Truth, the threats of the delusory mind and the
consequent dreamy vasanas will all be scraped away from
our cognition.
The bloody hands of the dreamer get automatically
cleaned and all the moral stigma attached to the murder
immediately gets cleared, when the dreamer wakes up.
Similarly, the mind and its onslaughts, its vasanas and
their tyranny, the intellect and its quest, the physical body
and its appetites... all, all end with the rediscovery of the
true nature of the Self. Therefore the poet-philosopher
Vyasa, in his immortal classic, Mahabharata, paints the
inner Self as Lord "Krishna," the Flute-player of
Vrindavana. In Sanskrit, this is a special art, unknown to
any other language in the world: the coining of a proper
noun for a person to indicate the peculiar quality that is to
be suggested in the context of
the narration.
ACCEPTING THE ARGUMENTS OF ARJUNA, THE
LORD ANSWERS THAT THERE IS A METHOD BY
WHICH THE INVINCIBLE MIND CAN BE BROUGHT
UNDER CONTROL:
472

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Blessed Lord said: 35. Undoubtedly, O mighty-armed one,
the mind is difficult to control and is restless; but, by practice, O
Son of Kunti, and by dispassion, it is restrained.
Krishna knew his Arjuna; the warrior, the man of action,
the daring adventurer, the ruthless realist. When such a
tumultuous personality spurs himself on with a drawn
dagger, as it were, either to agree with or to condemn the
noble philosophy of a true missionary, the teacher must
have the balance of mind to approach the rebel-intellect
with divine understanding and extreme tact. At this
juncture in the Geeta, the situation, in a nutshell, is this:
the Lord propounds a theory that MIND STILLED IS SELF
GAINED, and Arjuna argues that mind cannot be stilled
and so Self cannot be gained.
When an impetuous man like Arjuna gets hold of an idea
in all enthusiasm, the best technique is to yield to him to
start with. "Stooping to conquer" is the secret of success in
philosophical discussions, especially in such cases of
prejudice natural to the ignorant. Thus, the great
psychologist Krishna, with the very first word in his reply,
quietly disarms his mighty adversary, and tickles his
vanity with the term, "NO DOUBT, O MIGHTY-ARMED."
Krishna admits that the mind is turbulent, strong,
unyielding and restless and that it is very difficult to
control, and therefore, the goal of perfect and enduring
tranquillity, cannot EASILY be achieved.
473

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

By this admission Arjuna is flattered. By reminding him
that he is a mighty-armed soldier in life, he is mentally
brought to a restful peace. The taunting implication in it is
obvious; to achieve the impossible and the difficult is the
job of the mighty-armed: it is no glory for a warrior to
claim that he has plucked half-a-dozen flowers from a
bush in his own court-yard. The mind is, no doubt, a great
enemy --- but, the greater the enemy, the nobler the
victory.
In the second line of this stanza, the eternal missionary in
Krishna, very carefully weighs his words and uses the
most appropriate terms to soothe the mind of Arjuna. "O
SON OF KUNTI, IT CAN BE BROUGHT UNDER
CONTROL" is an assertion which comes only at the very
end of the stanza. Through practice and renunciation, the
mind can be brought under control in the beginning, and
ultimately to a perfect 'halt' --- this is the confident,
reassuring declaration of the Lord in the Geeta.
Renunciation has been already described earlier in the
Geeta as Samnyasa which was defined as renunciation of
(a) all clinging attachments to the objects of the world, (b)
lingering expectations for the fruits-of-action. These two
are the main causes for the agitation of thoughts, which
again thicken the flood of the thought-flow, and make the
mind uncontrollable. As Shankara declares, 'practice'
(Abhyasa) is "constant repetition of an idea regarding one
and the same object-of-thought." This consistency of
thought during steady meditation generally gets
474

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dissipated because of the frequent explosive eruptions of
desires. Whipped up by the new desires that are rising at
every moment, the thoughts wander into dissimilar
channels of activities, upsetting the inner equilibrium, and
thereby shattering the true vitality of the inner
personality.
Thus viewed, practice (Abhyasa) strengthens renunciation
(Samnyasa), which generates detachment (Vairagya), and
which in its turn deepens meditation (Abhyasa). Hand in
hand, each strengthening the other, the total progress is
steadily maintained.
In scriptural text-books, the arrangement of words is to be
carefully noted, for, in all cases, the words are arranged in
a descending order of importance. To very seeker the
question comes at one time or the other, whether he
should wait for the spirit of detachment arriving in his
mind of its own accord, or he should start his practice. The
majority wait in vain for the accidental arrival of the
moment of Vairagya before they start their Abhyasa. The
Geeta, in this stanza, by putting the word 'practice'
(Abhyasa) before the word 'detachment' (Vairagya) clearly
declares that such an expectation is as ridiculous as
waiting for the harvest of the crops that we have never
sowed!
Let us analyse life, question its experiences, argue with
ourselves and note carefully how much we put into life
475

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and how much, as a return, we gain from life. When we
become aware of the deficit balance, each time, we, of
necessity, shall start enquiring how our life could be more
profitably re-organised, so that our coffers of joy and
happiness could be replenished to their brim. Soon, the
study of the Shastras will follow, which will give us a peep
into the wonders of moral life, the wisdom of ethical
values, the joys of self-control, the thrills of growth, and
the consequent suffocation of the ego-centric little-life.
From the moment we start trying to become aware of our
own lives, we are in the realm of 'practice' (Abhyasa). As a
result of this, the detachment that comes automatically to
us is the true and enduring 'detachment' (Vairagya). All
else is a sham show of stupid self-denial, which cramps a
human being and distorts and perverts his intelligence
into an ugliness riddled with hysterical ravings and
bleeding with psychological ulcers. Vairagya born out of
Abhyasa alone is the charter for free spiritual growth; of
your own accord, never renounce anything. Let your
attachment-with-things drop off, of its own accord, as a
result of your intellectual growth into the higher planes of
better understanding and truer estimation of things and
beings, happenings and behaviours, occurrences and
incidents in life. When through right 'practice' enduring
'detachment' has come into our inner lives, then, the mind
comes under our control, because it has no more any
world of pluralistic objects to roam into, and the only
world which it now knows is the world of equanimity and
sameness. (V-19; VI-32).
476

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHAT THEN WILL BE THE LOT OF THOSE WHO
HAVE NO SELF-CONTROL?
36 . YOGA, I think is hard to be attained by one of uncontrolled
self; but the self-controlled, striving, can obtain it by (proper)
means.
In the previous stanza extreme emphasis was placed on
practice. But what constitutes the spiritual practice
(Abhyasa) was not indicated, even indirectly, in that verse.
A scientific book that leaves missing links, either in its
arguments, or in its logic, is no text-book at all. In the
stanza under review, Krishna is giving a direct clue to
what He means by the term 'practice' (Abhyasa).
He declares that the uncontrolled, and therefore, the
totally dissipated person, cannot bring into the field of
religion the necessary amount of dynamic vigour and
vitality to sustain him till he reaches the peak of his Selfrediscovery. It is therefore said: "Yoga IS HARD TO BE
ATTAINED BY ONE OF UNCONTROLLED SELF."
An individual who barters himself away to slave among
the sense-objects according to the mad dictates of his flesh
--- or he who dances to the death-tunes sung by his
sensuous mind --- or he who roams about endlessly to
fulfil the tyrannical demands of a drunken intellect --such a one has neither peace of mind nor the strength of
477

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sustained aspiration to goad him on towards the Templeof-Truth within himself.
As long as the sense-organs are not properly controlled,
'the agitations of the mind' cannot be pacified. An agitated
mind is no instrument, either for listening or for reflection
or for meditation --- and without these three, the 'veiling
power' cannot be rolled up. The agitations (Vikshepa) and
veiling (Avarana) are caused by 'activity' (Rajas) and
'inactivity' (Tamas), and we have already found that,
without controlling these two temperaments, the 'unactivity' (Sattwa) cannot come to predominate in the
seeker.
It is natural, in a discussion, that you have to present your
own arguments against a team of opposite arguments so
that the discriminative intellect of the listener may, by
contrast, easily judge the acceptability and logic of your
view-point. Krishna uses here this commonplace
technique of every drawing-room, when He, in the second
line, explains as a contrast, how "THE SELFCONTROLLED, STRIVING HARD, BY RIGHT MEANS,
CAN OBTAIN IT." Self-control, achieved through the
process of total withdrawal of the sense-organs from their
respective objects, is the beginning of spiritual life... and
this is never possible until we learn to turn our minds to
the Higher Truth.
Even in ordinary life, when he wants to achieve
something solid, the man-of-the-world will have to live to
478

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

a large extent in self-denial. The life of a candidate during
election time, that of a student before examinations, or of
an actor or a dancer before his first performance... are all
examples wherein we find that the individuals deny
themselves all their idle preoccupations in their anxiety
for success in their respective fields. If, for material gains
and flimsy ephemeral glories, we have to deny ourselves,
how much more should we deny ourselves the joys of the
world outside in order to win the glories of the Eternal
and the Permanent, the Infinite and the Absolute Bliss of
the Self!
It is not that the seeker should deny himself all senseobjects. This seems to be the general misunderstanding
among almost all seekers in India to-day. In the name of
religion or spiritual practice, many seekers, at least for
some years, live seemingly in self-denial and selfpunishment, shamelessly insulting themselves and
carelessly persecuting their own physical urges and even
biological needs. This sort of a devilish and suicidal selfcondemning tyranny of oneself, always ends in an
outburst of Satanic forces from within the very seeker.
Lest the student of the Geeta also should fall a prey to
such a misunderstood and misconceived spirituality,
Bhagawan indicates here, that the self-controlled seeker
can, "STRIVING RIGHTLY, OBTAIN IT." Not going to a
cinema and not visiting the playgrounds are not, in
themselves, assurances that the students will pass their
examinations. The time wasted in such merry-making
479

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

must be properly utilised in intelligent study, which alone
can vouchsafe for them a success in their examinations.
Here too, if a student appearing for an examination in
mathematics, were to read the whole night geography
text-books, he cannot hope for any glorious success; he
must STRIVE RIGHTLY in order to gain true success.
Similarly, when through self-control, a seeker has
conserved in himself energies which would otherwise
have got dissipated in the gutters of sensuality, he must
know how to direct those energies into the right channels,
whereby he can get himself detached from his
misconceived self-projections and ultimately realise for
himself his own Self-hood. That such an intelligent seeker
"CAN OBTAIN IT" is the optimistic philosophy of this
ever-smiling God of the Hindus, Lord Krishna.
With these two verses, Krishna exhaustively answers the
question raised by Arjuna, and what follows clearly
indicates that the Pandava Prince has been convinced by
the Lord's reply.
THE QUESTION YET REMAINS OF WHAT WOULD BE
THE LOT OF ONE, 'SELF-CONTROLLED, AND
STRIVING HARD THROUGH RIGHT MEANS; WHO
COULD NOT YET FULFIL AND REACH THE GOAL:
Arjuna said: 37. He who, though possessed of faith, is unable to
control himself, whose mind wanders away from YOGA, to
480

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

what end does he, having failed to attain perfection in YOGA
go, O Krishna?
In this and the following two verses Veda Vyasa makes
Arjuna raise a pertinent question, so that Krishna may get
yet another chance to bring the supremely optimistic
philosophy of Vedanta right in the footlights. None,
striving on the Path Divine, can ever be destroyed; and
whatever he accomplishes will be faithfully carried over,
as a legacy, by the individualised-self in its pursuit here
and in the hereafter. Each today is an added link in the
endless chain of the dead-and-gone yesterdays. The chain
continues growing, by adding to itself link after link, all
the yesterdays. Death is only one of the incidents in a
human existence and the tomorrow has no accidental, or
arbitrary beginning, but it is only a perfect continuation of
yesterday MODIFIED by the thoughts and actions of
today.
Carefully voicing his vague doubt, Arjuna asks as to what
will happen to one, who strives with deep faith (Shraddha),
but fails to accomplish complete self-control during his
life-time, or due to lack of sufficient self-control falls from
Yoga. The doubt is that such an individual may thereby
come to lose both the little joys of the sense-objects and the
Absolute Bliss in the hereafter. The Vedantins, even while
they condemn a mere life of sense-joys, do not for a
moment deny the fact that there ARE traces of joy in the
sense life also. According to them, daring thinkers that
they are, the joys of the sense-objects (Vishaya-ananda) are,
481

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in their essence, nothing other than glimpses of the
Spiritual Bliss (Brahmananda). The secret import of the
question is that those who faithfully follow Krishna's
theory may come to lose both the chances of experiencing
the finite and the Infinite joy.
Such a seeker, striving all his life to live in self-control,
will be a conscious escapist --- avoiding all the finite joytemptations in the gross world here. But, if the uncertain
factor --- death --- were to creep in to clip the thread of his
life with the scissors of time, he would lose his chances of
gaining the Absolute Beatitude, which is the goal that
Krishna seems to point out in his Divine Song. Again,
suppose that a seeker, due to a lack of self-control, falls
from Yoga. To win in Yoga, no doubt, is a great victory, a
GAIN PAR-EXCELLENCE. But if, in the race, one were to
get knocked down by the stealthy club of sensuousness,
one would stand to lose both here and hereafter.
Naturally, Arjuna wants some guidance from Krishna as
to what will happen to such an individual.
In this verse also, we must note very carefully, that the
term Shraddha is not some maddening superstition which
encourages a blind faith. According to Shankara, Shraddha
is the right intellectual apprehension of the deeper import
and the fuller significance of what the teachers teach and
the scriptures declare. The inspired devotion that springs
up in a bosom, from among its solid intellectual
convictions, gained through a true appreciation, is the
482

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mighty power called faith "that can move mountains" and
"can bring the very heavens on the earth."
TO THROW MORE COLOUR ON TO THE PICTURE OF
THE SPIRITUALLY DESPERATE SEEKER, WHOM
ARJUNA HAS ATTEMPTED TO PAINT IN THE
PREVIOUS STANZA, THE FOLLOWING IS ADDED:
38. Fallen from both, does he not, O mighty-armed, perish like a
rent cloud, supportless and deluded in the path of
BRAHMAN?
A sincere wayfarer, faithfully treading the path of selfcontrol to rediscover the Self, may get lost, if death were
to rob him on his way, or for want of complete self-control
he were to fall from Yoga. The striking example with
which this idea is brought out by Arjuna, is one of the
most brilliant poetic strokes in the entire Geeta. This is
often quoted in literary circles, whenever an attempt is
made to evaluate Vyasa, the poet, in Sanskrit literature.
In summer, mushroom-shaped floating castles of clouds
arise from behind the mountains to peep into the valleys
below. At the touch of some strong current of wind the
mass takes to flight, leaving along its trail, small bits of
fleecy cloudlets. Those little ones, torn away from the
parental bulk, get knocked about and are at the mercy of
every puff of breeze. Such summer cloudlets, aimlessly
kicked about according to the whims and fancies of the
483

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

winds, can never fulfil the expectations of the farmers, or
the clamour of the thirsty. Unfulfilling themselves, they
get tossed hither and thither without any haven for
themselves. "LIKE THE RENT CLOUD," Arjuna asks,
"will not the aspiring self in the seeker be forced to roam
about and ultimately get lost in the vast amphitheatre of
the Universe?"
WHY DOES ARJUNA ASK THIS QUESTION?
39. This doubt of mine, O Krishna, please dispel completely;
because it is not possible for any one but You to dispel this
doubt.
In this concluding verse of this section, Arjuna frankly
asks: "THIS DOUBT OF MINE, O KRISHNA, YOU
SHOULD COMPLETELY DISPEL."
"The Eternal Scraper," Lord Krishna, alone has the Pure
Wisdom that can rub out this doubt and quieten the
agitations caused by it, in the bosom of Arjuna. With this
question, it becomes amply clear that his previous doubt
has been totally dispelled. The earlier doubt was that:
"Self-Realisation is impossible, since the mind which is
ever turbulent can never be stilled." The reply of the Lord
had smoothened out this knotty kink in Arjuna's mind.
Every true seeker, if he be diligent enough, must come to
discover a couple of new doubts, when a previously
484

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

existing doubt has been cleared. The process of slowly
eliminating all these doubts, is the process of Vichara that
is practised both consciously and unconsciously, during
all Satsangas.
THE GLORIOUS LIFE OF THE HEREAFTER ASSURED
TO EVERY EVOLVER IS CLASSIFIED HEREUNDER, ON
THE BASIS OF THE INTENSITY OF THE MENTAL
ATTITUDE AND THE SPIRITUAL APTITUDE IN EACH
OF THEM.
IN THE FOLLOWING FIVE STANZAS, BHAGAWAN
TRIES TO EXPLAIN THE PATH OF PROGRESS OF A
SEEKER WHOSE SPIRITUAL ENDEAVOURS HAVE
BEEN EITHER CLIPPED BY AN UNTIMELY DEATH, OR
ARRESTED BY THE INTERVENTION OF SOME
SENSUOUS TEMPTATION.
The Blessed Lord said: 40. O Partha, neither in this world, nor
in the next world is there destruction for him; none, verily, who
strives to be good, O My son, ever comes to grief.
At the very opening of this section, Krishna assures, with
all emphasis at his command, that "NEITHER HERE NOR
IN THE HEREAFTER, IS THERE ANY DESTRUCTION
FOR HIM, WHO PERFORMS RIGHT ACTION."

485

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This statement is not a mere emotional assurance built
upon some blind faith, or a Godly declaration that is to be
swallowed down by the faithful, because of its being
sacred words that have come out of the lips of a Prophet.
The Hindus do not accept any divine prerogative, even for
their gods, by which they can by-pass the individual
intellect and the rules of logic. Religion is a "SCIENCE OF
LIFE" and it must completely explain the WHY and the
WHEREFORE of its practices.
Obedient to this incomparable trait in our culture, Krishna
supports his statement with the philosophical truth:
"NEVER FOR THE DOER OF GOOD, DEAR SON, A
WOEFUL END." One who acts rightly in the present, can
come to no grief in the future, because the future is but a
product of the past and the present.
The fear of Arjuna that the unsuccessful Yogin --- a seeker
obstructed and held up on the path --- will get lost "AS A
RENT CLOUD," here and in the hereafter, has risen from
his failure to appreciate the logical continuity and the
perfect sequence that is ever found in life. To consider that
death is the end of an existence which started with the
accident of birth, is a philosophy too rudimentary to be
considered complete and exhaustive. In fact, it is only
with a stretch of imagination that we can consider such a
theory as a philosophy.
Daring intellects, bravely pushing ahead in the quest to
understand and comprehend the laws of life and the
486

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

meaning and purpose of the Universe, cannot but accept
that the existence of an individual in its present
embodiment is but a single pearl in the necklace of Infinite
Beauty adorning the bosom of Truth. The present is the
product of the past, and thought by thought, action by
action, knowledge by knowledge, we are creating for
ourselves in the present the blue-print of our future.
Therefore, the Hindus believe in previous lives as well as
in future births for all embodied souls; this is otherwise
called the theory of re-incarnation.
Based upon this principle, Krishna insists that no seeker is
ever lost, although he may slip and fall, or even end his
present manifestation; tomorrow is but today modified,
but directly continued.
In addressing Arjuna as "O MY SON," Krishna has here
not only followed the traditional practice of the
Upanishads, but there is also a deeper significance.
However deceitful, cunning and cruel a brute one might
be to everyone else in the world, one cannot ever come to
advise a false philosophy to his own son. With fatherly
love, the Man-of-Wisdom in Krishna is assuring Arjuna
that one who is striving in the direction of evolution shall
never come to suffer any REAL fall. On the ladder of
cultural growth, each step that is placed forward is an
ascent towards the Absolute Perfection.
WHAT EXACTLY WOULD BE THE DESTINY OF A
MAN
WHO
COULD
NOT
COMPLETE
HIS
487

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PILGRIMAGE IN YOGA? WHAT HAPPENS TO HIM
THEN?
41 Having attained to the worlds of the righteous, and having
dwelt there for everlasting (long) years, he who had fallen from
YOGA is born again in the house of the pure and the wealthy.
The hereafter is ordered by the actions performed and the
motives entertained here. Actions in life can be mainly
classified as good and evil; and the pursuers of the evil
can only slip down the path of evolution. Those who are
doing good work alone can start their climb on to the
higher points on the tower of their spiritual progress.
Even here, our text-books make a careful distinction and
classify all good activities under two main headings: (a)
actions performed with desires, and (b) those that are
performed in a spirit of dedicated love and in a sense of
divine worship. Since reactions to actions depend entirely
upon the motives that propel those actions, the results
accruing from selfish and selfless activities must
necessarily differ from one another. Naturally, there must
be different routes of progress to the same Pinnacle of
Perfection. All of them are being indicated here in this
section.
Those who are employing themselves in the worship of
the Lord with desire for heavenly enjoyments will, after
their death, reach those planes-of-consciousness which are
conducive for exhausting all such desires and, having
488

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

exhausted these desires therein, they will take their birth
again, here in the world, "IN THE HOUSES OF THE
PURE AND THE PROSPEROUS." In short, all burning
desires of every human will be fulfilled at one time or
another, if the desires are strong enough and are
accompanied by intense activities appropriate for their
fulfilment.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS TO THOSE WHO ARE
PURSUING THE GOOD, IN A SPIRIT OF SELF-LESS
DEDICATION?
42. Or, he is even born in the family of the wise YOGIS; verily,
a birth like this is very difficult to obtain in this world.
The other type, which makes a direct and immediate
manifestation, in which the continuity of the past is clearly
noticeable, is the theme of this stanza. Those who are
pursuing selfless Upasanas, thereby gain more and more
inner integration and as a result of it, they become
dynamic minds capable of the highest meditation. The
more integrated a personality, the more spiritual he
becomes, and therefore, he must be given a chance to fulfil
himself, not in heaven, which is a plane for enjoyment, but
he must arrive right here to strive more diligently and
achieve the highest. Such an ego-centre (Jeeva), as soon as
it leaves one embodiment immediately comes to manifest
itself in a conducive atmosphere, where it can continue its
pilgrimage without any obstruction. It being an aspiring
489

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

heart, it should necessarily come to be "BORN ONLY IN A
FAMILY OF WISE-MEN-OF-MEDITATION."
This theory gives a lot of insight into the present-day
fallacy which gives such an exaggerated importance to
one's unhealthy environments and makes everyone
protest against one's surroundings. No doubt, in some
ways man is a creature of his environments; but the same
statement, when viewed through the glasses of
philosophy, gives also an insight into the fact that the
individuals, in their own freedom, had themselves
ordered in the past their own present environments. By
merely changing his environments, the individual
concerned cannot progress; a habitual drunkard may still
continue drinking on the sly, even if he were to be brought
into a dry city to live among teetotallers.
Examples like Shankara, Christ, Buddha, and other great
masters can be considered as supporting this
philosophical theory. Such men of brilliant genius, who,
from their very early youth, exhibit superhuman
knowledge and Godly wisdom, are no doubt, rare.
Krishna himself accepts here that such persons are "VERY
RARE TO OBTAIN IN THIS WORLD." If the previous
stanza explained the re-birth of an ego (Jeeva) after an
interval of existence in the heavens, this stanza explains
the lives of the few, who, after departing from one
embodiment, immediately arrive in this world to continue
their pilgrimage to Perfection.
490

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

AFTER REACHING SUCH CONDUCIVE AND
HELPFUL ENVIRONMENTS, WILL THE FALLEN YOGI
OF THE LAST LIFE CONTINUE HIS SPIRITUAL LIFE?
LISTEN:
43. There he comes to be united with the knowledge acquired in
his former body and strives more than before for Perfection, O
son of the Kurus.
It may be feared, that an individual who is thus born
again, will have to start his studies and practices all over
again. To remove any such doubt, Krishna explains here
that such an individual, in his new life, under the
conducive circumstances, gets naturally "UNITED WITH
THE INTELLIGENCE ACQUIRED IN HIS FORMER
BODY." Such a born-Yogi completes his education much
more easily than others, since, to him, it is not an
education that is needed, but only a revision, or a
recapitulation. In a very short time, he discovers that all
knowledge is bubbling up from within himself, and to
him study is but a rediscovery of a digested knowledge
which was already lying dormant in him.
Not only does he discover in himself the knowledge that
he had acquired in the past, but he easily finds in himself
the required enthusiasm and energy for a consistent selfapplication and vigorous pursuit. Knowledge without
practice is a dull, dreary load upon the shoulders of a
seeker. Krishna asserts here that one "fallen from Yoga" in
491

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the past, when he is reborn in the right atmosphere, not
only regains all knowledge easily, but he comes to
"STRIVE MORE THAN BEFORE, FOR PERFECTION, O
SON OF THE KURUS."
HOW CAN ONE GET UNITED WITH THE
INTELLIGENCE ACQUIRED IN HIS FORMER
EMBODIMENT? LISTEN:
44. By that very former practice he is borne on inspite of himself.
Even he who merely wishes to know YOGA goes beyond the
SHABDA BRAHMAN.
At any given moment our bank balance is the balance to
our credit shown in our 'statement of account.' No banker
can give us more, nor can he cheat us with a smaller
amount. Almost in the same fashion, in the cultural
growth of a given mind and intellect, no god can either
take away any or give some more, but can only hand over
to each one of us his own exact "balance." Each birth has a
logical continuity with its own past, as strictly as we
experience in day-to-day life. Today is but an extension of
yesterday. With the full understanding of this law of life
in our mind, if we are to re-read the stanza, its suggestions
become quite clear automatically, without any strain.
An individual who has been in Yoga in his past life, will
be, "BY THAT VERY FORMER PRACTICE, BORNE ON
IN SPITE OF HIMSELF." This is true even in our life here.
492

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

An educated man will, IN SPITE OF HIMSELF, be carried
away in his behaviour and conversation to exhibit his
cultivated mental and disciplined physical habits. No
cultured man can successfully imitate the idiot for a long
time; so too, no rascal can act the part of the noble-born for
any length of time. Both will, sooner or later, be
compelled, IN SPITE OF THEMSELVES, to exhibit
unconsciously their true nature through their words,
ideas, and actions.
Similarly, a man who had in the past lived the life of selfcontrol, study, and practice gathers unto himself those
cultural traits and he, in this life, IN SPITE OF HIMSELF
and in spite of all his adverse circumstances,
environments and conditions of life, cannot but
instinctively come to exhibit --- in his attitudes to life, and
in his behaviour towards the things and beings in the
world --- a tranquillity and a balance, which are a surprise
even to himself.
This is no mere theory. The truth of the statement is amply
evident everywhere in any society, in all strata of its life,
in all its professions and in all departments of its activities.
Each one of us has an instinctive bent of mind, and we are
irresistibly drawn towards it, IN SPITE OF OURSELVES.
This pull is most powerful when arising from our essential
evolutionary tendencies. Even a bandit chieftain can,
overnight, turn himself to be a determined seeker and, ere
long, become a great poet of the land, as Valmiki did in
the past. Hundreds of such examples could be noted from
493

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

our recent history and even amidst us today. In all those
cases, the only satisfactory explanation will be that the
individual mind-and-intellect was expressing through its
given physical structure its own characteristic tendencies,
which it had acquired by itself in its past incarnations,
through its own willful actions and deliberate motives.
When an individual, who was a fallen Yogi in the past, is
reborn, "IN SPITE OF HIMSELF" he is drawn towards a
life of meditation and quietude, of seeking and striving, of
self-control and discipline. Let him be put on the throne of
a kingdom, or in the bustle of a market-place, or in the
ignominy of the gutters, he cannot but express his nobility
of heart and the philosophical bent of his mind. All the
wealth in the world brought under command,
unquestioned might and power gained, love and respect
given... yet he cannot be dissuaded from his Path Divine.
If the whole world stands surprised at his peculiar
tendencies, he himself is one of those who are gazing on
with the wildest surprise, with the utmost amazement!!
"BY THAT PREVIOUS PRACTICE ALONE IS HE BORNE
ON IN SPITE OF HIMSELF."
After observing this philosophical truth, Lord Krishna is
naturally tempted to express the glory of meditation
(Yoga). He says "ONE WHO HAS EVEN THE WISH TO
KNOW CONTROL (YOGA), HE PASSES BEYOND THE
VEDIC RITUAL." According to Shankara, the term
"Shabda-brahman" used here denotes "the words in the
Veda," wherein the term Veda indicates only the "ritualistic
494

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

portion." Therefore, the Acharya, commenting upon this
portion, says that such an individual goes beyond all the
charms for the promised fruits of the Vedic rituals. This
may rightly be considered as too laboured a commentary,
although its implications are only too true. One who has
warped his mind in the practice of self-control, study, and
meditation in the past, could not have any more
fascination for the material wealth or the sensuous life,
however celestial they might be. Even if this interpretation
fits in with the context, we must admit that it has been
laboriously stretched by the teacher of the Advaitaphilosophy.
HOW IS THE PATH OF MEDITATION NOBLER THAN
ALL OTHERS? LISTEN:
45. But the YOGI, who strives with assiduity, purified from
sins and perfected (gradually) through many births, then attains
the highest Goal.
As already noticed, the mind-intellect equipment of an
individual functions through his body in the world
outside as per the traits chalked out upon it by the actions
performed in its earlier lives. These channels of thinking
cut across the fields of the mind determine the direction of
its thoughts and the texture of its actions in the present.
These lacerations on the subtle body are called in Vedanta
as 'SINS,' or as the 'DIRT OF THE WITHIN.' These
495

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

impurities are removed and the existing ulcers healed
through selfless action.
But even while rejecting the wrong negative tendencies of
the mind, the individual will have to plough the fields of
his mind with new patterns representing the constructive
divine tendencies. These meritorious vasanas (punya) can
also provide a severe obstruction for a man of meditation.
After having purified his mind of its unethical and
sensuous tendencies, the aspirant should practise
meditation. During the still moments of peace in the depth
of his depths, when he exposes his mind to the thrilled
atmosphere of its vibrant silence, the noble traits also get
completely wiped off. A state of mind which is thus
rendered completely impressionless (vasana-less) is the
end of the mind, since mind is nothing but a bundle of
vasanas. Where the mind has ended, there the ego has also
ended having "THEN REACHED THE HIGHEST GOAL,
or gained Self-rediscovery.
The explanation of this theory would not perhaps occupy
more than half a page, but in actually carving it our into
our individual life, it may be a programme for very many
lives' consistent practice. "Through many births" is a
phrase used in the Upanishads by the honest "Scientists of
Life," the Rishis, and they are perfectly right; for evolution,
as we all know, is not a drama played out during an
afternoon, but it is the slow revelation of the history of
progress through endless aeons.
496

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

To one who has the proper temperament to seek Life, the
anxiety to realise the Perfection, the capacity to
understand the hollowness of sense-life, the daring to
follow the narrow foot-prints of the Seers of the world, the
appetite for Infinite peace and tranquillity, the courage to
live the moral and the ethical values, the heroism to barter
one's all to achieve the highest... such a one is not a
"mineral-man," nor a "vegetable-specimen," nor an
"animal-man," but he is the noblest creation under the
Sun, a perfect "man-man," standing right in front of the
Doors of Truth, demanding as a "God-man" his admission
into the SANCTUM SANCTORUM!
Right now, this very life IS OUR LAST BIRTH, if we have
a taste to meditate, an urge to seek, a daring to live the
Life Divine!
There is nothing which may sound original in this
interpretation to all diligent students of the Geeta. A
sacred text-book that has been roaring, time and again, in
an irrepressible spirit of optimism, the message of hope
and cheer, with no threats of hell and brimstone anywhere
in it, cannot be considered to have changed its music all of
a sudden, to declare that man has hopes of salvation only
after "many births" and not "here and now." Even though
this misinterpretation may perhaps be helpful to the
saboteurs of our religion, no intelligent student of the
Geeta can, even for a moment, be hoodwinked by such
false notes.
497

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THEREFORE:
46. The YOGI is thought to be superior to the ascetics, and even
superior to men-of-knowledge (mere scholars) ; he is also
superior to men-of-action; therefore (you strive to) be a YOGI,
O Arjuna.
In order to bring out the importance of meditation among
the various practices in the Science of Spiritual
development, Lord Krishna is providing here a tabulated
list of the various types of seekers, indicating the greatest
of the whole lot. Compared with those who practise
thoughtless and dull-witted physical self-denial
(Tapaswins), the meditator is certainly nobler.
Nobler than those who vigorously read the scriptures and
try to learn and remember their declarations (Jnanis), is the
Yogi (Meditator).
There are others who strive towards the same Bright Peak
of Perfection, treading along the path of selfless work
(Karmis), undertaken in the world outside in a spirit of
Yajna, (IV-24 to 30.) and who perform worship (Upasana)
in a spirit of divine dedication. These ritualists, both in the
secular and in the sacred fields of activities, believe that
they can reach the Infinite Bliss through these very
activities.

498

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Krishna concludes here that a silent and quiet meditator,
who struggles hard to withdraw himself from his own
false identifications with his body, mind and intellect,
through constant and consistent contemplation upon the
nature of the Self, is ever the best.
Thus, comparing a meditator with: (a) a man of utter selfdenial, (b) deep students of the scriptures, and (c)
ritualists, Krishna concludes his observations that a
meditator alone is the best among the whole lot, standing
nearest to Truth and "THEREFORE, YOU BE A YOGI
(MEDITATOR), O ARJUNA."
THERE ARE DIFFERENT TYPES OF MEDITATORS,
EACH MEDITATING UPON A DIFFERENT POINT OF
CONTEMPLATION. WHO AMONG THEM IS THEN
THE BEST AND THE GREATEST MEDITATOR? LISTEN:
47. And among all YOGIS, he who, full of faith, with his innerself merged in Me, worships Me, is, according to Me, the most
devout.
Whereas the previous stanza gives us a relative estimate
of the different paths in spirituality, and finally declares
that meditation is the best among the lot, the stanza now
under review explains who exactly is the best among all
the meditators. Meditation is, in the beginning at least, a
deliberate act by which the seeker strives to keep his
thoughts channelised into one pre-determined divine line
499

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of thinking; and this is maintained by disallowing the
mind to run into dissimilar thought-channels. Meditation,
therefore, must of necessity start with an effort on the part
of the meditator to fix his mind upon some object of
contemplation. The Art of Meditation can be classified
under different types, according to the nature of the object
of contemplation chosen and according to the nature of
the persuasions adopted in curtailing the mind from its
mad roamings.
Thus we have, in the tradition of our practices,
meditations prescribed upon a symbol, on the Godprinciple with a form, on the teacher, on the Kundalini, on
any of the great elements, or on a chosen scriptural text.
Accordingly, the practitioners may be considered as
followers of different kinds of meditation. The Singer of
the Geeta is trying to indicate here, who exactly is to be
considered as the best and the most successful meditator
among the types mentioned above.
In this concluding stanza of the chapter, the Lord insists
that of all the meditators, he who "WITH HIS INNERSELF (MIND-AND-INTELLECT) MERGED IN THE SELF,
AND WITH 'SHRADDHA' DEVOTES HIMSELF TO THE
SELF, IS THE MOST FIRM AND STEADFAST
MEDITATOR." The pregnant suggestions contained in
this stanza can fill volumes, inasmuch as it is a summary
of the entire Yoga Shastra. Naturally therefore, Lord
Krishna dedicates the entire length of the next chapter as
an annotation to this mantra-like stanza.
500

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

For the purpose of our understanding this chapter, it is
sufficient for the time-being if we gather from this stanza
that the essence of meditation is not so much in our
attempt at integrating the mind as in the ultimate merging
of the inner equipment (Antahkarana), and getting it
completely sublimated in the final experience of the Self.
That, this can be done only by one who does proper
Bhajana upon the Self with all Shraddha, is the truthdeclaration made here with a loving insistence by the
Eternal Lover of the gopis.
The term Bhajana has come to gather to itself such a lot of
adventitious superstitions that, as it is understood today,
it means elaborate rituals, which, almost always, mean
nothing to the priest, nor to the devotees who are mere
onlookers of the priestly performances. Sometimes it
means a lot of loud singing with noisy accompaniments,
and an entire crowd roaring away on their march towards
an emotional ecstasy, and often, each session ending in
hysteria and exhaustion. Very rarely do they gain even a
vague experience of the spiritual thrill. In the Vedantic
text-books, Bhajana is "the attempt of the ego to pour itself
out" in an act of devoted dedication towards the Principle
of Reality, whereby the devoted personality successfully
invokes the experience that lies beyond the noisy shores of
the mind-intellect equipment. One who does this
invocation (Bhajana) of the Self, and naturally gets himself
merged in that awakening, is declared here by the teacher
of the Geeta, as belonging to the highest type of
meditation.
501

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is quite evident to every student of Vedanta that such a
meditator comes to transcend all his identifications with
the false matter-envelopments, and becomes, through the
experience of his Real Nature, the very Self. Yet, the
mouth-piece of renascent Hinduism, Lord Krishna, in his
modesty and reverence for the tradition in our culture,
attributes this statement in the stanza to his own personal
opinion.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta, in the Science
of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the dialogue between Sri
Krishna and Arjuna, the sixth discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF
MEDITATION

Nowhere else in the entire extent of the voluminous
spiritual literature that we have in the Upanishads, the
Brahmasutra and the Geeta (Prasthana Traya), can we find
such a wealth of details, explaining not only the technique
of meditation but also the possible pitfalls and how to
avoid them successfully, as we have them so clearly and
vividly explained here. No scripture fails to hint at the
Path of Meditation, as the way to reach the highest
possibilities in life, and yet, nowhere have we, among our
reported and compiled heritage of sacred books, such a
vivid discussion of the entire path. To a true seeker,
indeed, a thorough study of the Sixth Chapter is ample
direction and guidance to reach the highest through
Meditation. It is therefore but proper that this chapter is
put under the title: "The Yoga of Meditation."
Om Om Om Om Om

502

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 7
Jnana Vijnana Yoga
The Yoga of Wisdom and knowledge
The Blessed Lord said: 1. With the mind intent on Me, Partha,
practising YOGA and taking refuge in Me, how thou shalt,
without doubt, know Me fully, that do thou hear.
It would be, naturally, the doubt of all seekers, especially
before they enter the seat of meditation, as to how it is
possible for a limited mind to understand or embrace the
unlimited. This doubt can come to such seekers, who try
only for intellectual appreciation of the philosophy of
Vedanta; but all seekers could only be, in the beginning,
mere scholarly students of the Vedantic literature. This is
an unavoidable state in the Path of knowledge. The
Science of Vedanta exhaustively deals with this problem
and tries to explain how the mind, when made to meditate
upon the Infinite, comes to transcend its own limitations
and comes to experience the Infinite.
Here Krishna, introducing the theme to be dealt with in
the next six chapters, assures Arjuna that He would
explain the entire science and technique, which will
clearly show how a meditator, by fixing his integrated
mind upon the contemplation of the NATURE of the Self,
can come to experience the Divine. From this chapter
503

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

onwards the term 'mind' is to be understood, not as a
debilitated and disintegrated mind, but as an integrated
mind properly tutored to walk, implicitly obeying the will
of the discriminative intellect. When such a mind is firmly
established in full concentration upon the divine nature of
its Godly potentialities, the seeker evolves double quick.
The logic of this inward development, it is promised, will
be the theme of this section.
NOW LISTEN TO WHAT I AM GOING TO SAY AS TO
HOW YOU ALSO, THUS ACTING, WILL, WITHOUT
DOUBT, KNOW ME IN FULL, POSSESSED OF INFINITE
GREATNESS, STRENGTH, GRACE AND OTHER
APPARENT ATTRIBUTES:
2. I shall declare to thee in full this knowledge combined with
realisation, which being known, nothing more here remains to
be known.
According to Shankara, speculative knowledge is Jnana,
and actual experience of the perfection is Vijnana. Here
Krishna is promising that he would not only deliver to
Arjuna the theoretical explanation of the Art of Divine
Life, but also, during the very discourse, take him to the
highest peak of Self-rediscovery. This may look rather
unbelievable but unlike Yoga and other types of
philosophies in India, Vedanta is not an indirect process,
inasmuch as, after the study of this Shastra, it is not
necessary for A FIT STUDENT to retire into the jungles to
504

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

practise and bring the experience of perfection into his
cognition.
During the very discourse, if the student is mentally fit to
walk along with the teacher step by step and follow
carefully the logic and significance of his explanations, he
can gain glimpses of realisation during the very hours of
his study. It is because of this that Vedanta is taught only
to a student who has been made fit for this flight to the
beyond. If an individual student is perfectly integrated
inwardly and if he can continuously maintain his
adventurous thirst to experience the Reality, then he, in
his attempt to identify himself with the thought and the
spirit of his teacher's discourses, can ultimately come to
revel in the experience of the very goal that is indicated by
Vedanta. Self-realisation is instantaneous, during the study
and understanding of scriptures, gained through the
teacher-taught discussions.
IF VEDANTA IS THUS A COMPLETE SCIENCE, AND
THE EXPERIENCE OF THE DIVINITY OF THE SELF
CAN BE HAD EVEN DURING THE VERY TEACHERTAUGHT DISCUSSIONS, HOW IS IT THAT SELFREALISED MASTERS ARE SO RARE IN THE WORLD?
LISTEN:
3. Among thousands of men, one perchance strives, for
perfection; even among those successful strivers, only one
perchance knows Me in essence.
505

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The idea that Vedantic realisation and knowledge can
come into the experience of only a rare few has been
repeatedly emphasised in different portions of spiritual
literature in India, by different Masters, in different
expressions. We were told previously (II-29) how the very
theoretical side of Vedanta is heard and understood as
marvel. In the Upanishads also, the same idea has been
very clearly expressed by the Rishis.
Here, however, Krishna shifts the entire responsibility for
not realising the Self upon the individual seeker himself
and attributes it entirely to the sadhaka's lack of selfapplication. Vedanta being a subjective science, it is not
sufficient that we know how to eradicate our weaknesses
and cultivate our inward strength, but we must also live
up to those ideals and try to bring about the necessary readjustments in ourselves. Very few can discover in
themselves this necessary urge to evolve.
Of the thousands that hear intelligently, and perhaps
understand all the theory and text of Vedanta, only a few
sincerely apply themselves to live fully the Vedantic wayof-life. Even among a thousand such sincere seekers, only
a rare-few "COME TO KNOW ME AND MY REAL
NATURE."
The chances are that when this Vedantic way of life is
perfectly explained by a Sad-Guru to a student, who is
seemingly attending with all enthusiasm, with sincerity
and concentration, he may raise himself up to, perhaps,
506

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the very gates of Truth, but there, he himself may come to
bar his own entry into the sanctum 'within.' There, some
imperceptible vanity, or unsuspected desire, is sufficient
to exile him from himself. In this sense, there is a wealth of
meaning in Lord Christ's declaration that a camel can pass
through the eye-of-a-needle more easily then a "rich" man
through the gates of heaven --- the RICHES here are not
the 'worldly wealth,' but the individual's mental vasanawealth. Unless the mind is perfectly naked, it has no entry
into the Bliss of Truth.
Viewing the stanza in the light of the Krishna-spirit, it
only means that rare indeed are people who come to
study sincerely and get a true glimpse of the Vedantaliterature, and only a low percentage of these again can
discover in themselves the necessary mental stamina, the
intellectual vision and the physical forbearance to live that
life of truth and purity in the world. Since Arjuna and all
the students of the Geeta are such rare souls, they
represent the community of evolvers. To them Krishna
promises that He can, through His Divine Song, not only
deliver the speculative part of the philosophy of Vedanta
but also practically hand over chances to live subjectively
the vital moments of vivid inner experience of the Self.
HAVING PREPARED THE HEARER FOR THE
TEACHING, BY INDUCING IN HIM A TASTE FOR IT,
THE LORD PROCEEDS THUS:

507

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

4. Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect, egoism --- these
are My eight-fold PRAKRITI.
In an attempt to explain the world outside as a marriage
between matter and spirit, great thinkers of the Vedic
period had exercised their philosophical acumen and had
given us the Sankhyan Philosophy. According to them, the
Spiritual Factor (Purusha) presiding over a given matter
envelopment, dynamises the inert matter and makes the
insentient mineral assembly to act, as though it is
intelligent and vital. This idea becomes clear to us when
we take an example from the modern world.
With steel and iron, the manufacturer completes a steamengine and when the cold engine is harnessed to steam, at
high pressure, it does work. Steam by itself can never
express its dynamic capacity and strength; on the other
hand, when it is made to work through a given
equipment, it is capable of adding motion and
performance to the inert iron assemblage.
Thus, one of the schools of philosophy in India tries to
explain scientifically, how the Eternal and the Perfect Self
comes to express Itself as the world-of-plurality, in the
embrace of matter. This also explains the relationship
between Spirit and matter. The technical terms used in the
philosophy for those two items are: Prakriti, for the
"matter-envelopments," and Purusha for the "Spirit-factor."

508

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Krishna explains in this and the following stanza, all the
items that together constitute the matter and those that
constitute the Spiritual Entity within a living man. Once
the individual comes to understand clearly the distinction
between matter and Spirit he will indeed come to
understand that the Spirit identifying with matter, is the
cause for all Its sufferings and when It is detached from Its
identifications, it rediscoveres for itself its own essential
nature as Perfection and Bliss Absolute. The spirit
identifying with matter, and sharing the destinies of the
inert equipment, is called the "ego" (Jeeva). It is the "ego"
that comes to rediscover itself to be nothing other than the
Spirit that presides over matter.
In order to make Arjuna realise how exactly one is to
understand the true nature of the Self, in all Its divine
might and glory, Lord Krishna tries to enumerate the
matter-aspect, as distinct from the Spiritual-Truth in each
individual.
The five great elements, mind, intellect and ego constitute,
according to the Geeta, the eight-fold Prakriti that has
come to be superimposed upon the Truth through
ignorance. The five great cosmic elements are represented
in the microcosm by the five sense-organs by which the
individual comes to experience and live in the world of
sense-objects. Thus, the list making up Prakriti is nothing
other than the subtle body and its vehicles of expression
are constituted of the sense-organs. The sense-organs are
the channels through which the world of stimuli reaches
509

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

within, and the inner point of focus of the five senseorgans is called the "mind". The impulses received by the
mind are rationally classified and systematised into the
knowledge of their perception by the intellect. At all these
three levels of sense perception, mental reception, and
intellectual assimilation, there is a continuous sense of Iness, which is called the "ego". These constitute the
equipments through which, at the touch of Life, man
functions as the intelligent being that he is.
WHAT THEN IS YOUR HIGHER NATURE? LISTEN:
5. This is the "lower" PRAKRITI; different from it, know thou,
O mighty-armed, My "Higher' ' PRAKRITI , the very Lifeelement, by which this world is upheld.
After enumerating in the above stanza the "lower" nature
of the Self, Krishna says that this is not all. The Self
possesses, besides these equipments, a Higher-Nature
which is constituted of Pure Consciousness, or Awareness.
It is this Spiritual Entity that makes it possible for the
body, mind and intellect, made up of mere inert minerals,
to act as if they were in themselves so vitally sentient and
intelligent.
The Spiritual Factor is the entity by whose contact the
equipments function, and without which the equipments
become dull and insentient. If Consciousness were not in
us, we would not be able to experience either the world
510

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

outside or the world within us. It is the Consciousness that
maintains, nourishes, and sustains all the possibilities in
us. Without this Spiritual Spark functioning in us, we
would be no more intelligent or divine than the "stoneworld".
Even by a more material consideration, we can logically
come to accept the conclusions declared in this stanza. I
am standing on the floor of my house; the house is
supported by my piece of land; the land is protected by
the city Corporation; the city is supported by the country;
and the country is supported by the world; the world is
supported by water --- the waters of the ocean; water is
held in position by the atmosphere, and the atmosphere is
a part of the planetary system! The universe stays in
space, and this space rests upon the "concept of space" that
is in our mind! The mind gets its support from the
judgement of the intellect. Since the decision of the
intellect is known and realised by the Consciousness in us,
this Spiritual Entity is, indeed, the ultimate support for the
entire world-of-change (Jagat)!!!
In philosophy, the term Jagat means not only the world of
objects perceived by us though our sense-organs, but it
includes in its concept, the world experienced through
and interpreted by the mind and intellect also. Thus the
world-of-objects, the world-of-feelings, and the world-ofideas that we experience, together, in their totality,
constitute the Jagat. This is supported by the Conscious
Principle with Its grace showering upon them all. In this
511

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sense also, Krishna's declarations are scientifically true,
when He says that the "Higher" Prakriti, the Principle of
Consciousness, is that
"BY WHICH THIS ENTIRE WORLD OF EXPERIENCES IS
SUSTAINED."
HOW IS THE SELF THE CREATOR, SUSTAINER AND
THE DESTROYER OF THE WORLD? LISTEN:
6. Know that these (two PRAKRITIS ) , are the womb of all
beings. So I am the source and dissolution of the whole universe.
The above-mentioned Higher and lower-nature, each
functioning in the embrace of the other, cause all the
manifestations of the world of plurality. If matter were not
there, the latent dynamism in the Spirit will not find a
field for Its expression. Matter, by itself, in its inertness,
will not be able to express the similitude of Consciousness
unless the Spirit were there to dynamise it. Electricity,
expressing itself through the filament in the bulb,
manifests as light. Without the bulb, the light in the
electricity cannot manifest itself, nor can the bulb smile
forth in light without the electrical current flowing
through it. The bulb is the equipment, functioning
through which, electricity expresses itself as light.
Similarly, the Spirit, when it comes to function through
the five layers of matter, discovers for Itself a field to
express Its own potentialities.
512

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Keeping this idea in mind, Lord Krishna declares here:
"THESE TWO ARE THE WOMB OF ALL BEINGS." It is
not very difficult for an intelligent student to understand
what it actually means. Not only does the pluralistic
world of objects, feelings, and ideas rise from, and stay in
the Spirit, but it dissolves into It, again to become the
Higher-Nature. Thus, the lower-nature is, in its essential
constitution, nothing other than the Higher. The Higher,
forgetting Its own divinity, identifies Itself with the lower
and comes to the ego-centric sorrows and imperfections.
The Higher seemingly suffers, at present, in Its own
delusions, the sorrows of the lower. Its own rediscovery of
Its native divine glory is the redemption of matter. The
idea that the lower has arisen from the Higher is likened
to the way in which pots of different shapes and colours
have all arisen from the mud. Just as the mud is the truth
in all the pots, the Higher is the essential Reality in all the
objects of the sense-organs, mind and intellect which the
lower procreates.
THEREFORE:
7. There is nothing whatsoever higher than Me, O Dhananjaya.
All this is strung in Me, as clusters of gems on a string.
There are two possible points of view of life, if the abovementioned theory is accepted. There is a point of view
from the lower and distinctly different from it, there is a
point of view from the Higher also. Just as in mud there
513

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

are none of the different shapes and colours of the pots, so
too in the Pure Consciousness there is none of the worldsof-objects, or feelings or ideas. "BESIDES ME THERE IS
NAUGHT."
After waking up, to the waker, there is nothing of the
dream-world for his recognition. In the endless waves that
rise in the ocean there is nothing other than the ocean
itself. None of the waves can rise, nor stay, nor ultimately
reach anywhere but the ocean itself. In short, nothing can
remain ever totally divorced from its own essentialnature.
The first line indicates that each one of us has a "lowernature" which is married to our own Self, but still, the
doubt might come into the minds of the students of the
Geeta, "that the Self in me is different from the Self in all
others." This logic of thinking may, as a result, take us to
the conclusion that there are as many different Selves as
there are different bodies in the world.
To show that the Self is one and the same in all forms, it
has been said here that the Lord is the common factor in
all forms in the universe. He holds them all intact as the
string holds all the pearls in a necklace. These words have
deep significance. Not only is it beautiful in its poetic
suggestion, but it has also a very exhaustive philosophical
implication. The pearls in the necklace are necessarily
uniform and homogeneous, and its thread, which is
generally unseen, passes through the central core of every
514

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

pearl, and holds them all, the big and the small, into a
harmonious ornament of beauty.
Again, the substance of which the pearls are made is
totally different from the constituents that go to make the
thread. Similarly, the world is constituted of an infinite
variety of names and forms, which are all held together by
the Spiritual Truth into a complete whole. Even in an
individual, the mind, the intellect, the body, each different
from the others, can harmoniously work and unitedly give
the music of life for him because the same Conscious
Principle works through all those different and varying
matter-envelopments.
Here is an instance wherein we see Shri Veda Vyasa
typically expressing himself as the poet-philosopher of the
world. This example is not only poetical but also deeply
philosophical.
FURTHER:
8. I am the sapidity in water, O son of Kunti, I am the light in
the moon and the sun; I am the syllable OM in all the VEDAS,
sound in ether, and virility in men;
9. I am the sweet fragrance in earth and the brilliance in fire, the
life in all beings, and I am austerity in the austere.

515

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

How the Supreme Self can be the "thread" upon which the
'pearls' consisting of individual elements of plurality are
strung together to become the 'necklace' of the
harmonious universe, is described in these two verses. It
has already
been said, "MY HIGHER PRAKRITI, THE PRINCIPLE OF
CONSCIOUSNESS," is the womb of all beings, and that
"BEYOND ME THERE IS NAUGHT." What can be this
Eternal Factor, which is common in every one --- and yet
not readily perceptible to all --- is the doubt that has been
cleared here.
That which remains in a substance from the beginning to
the end, constantly, and without which the thing cannot
ever maintain its identity, is called its Dharma --- which is
its LAW OF BEING. The examples of 'sapidity in water.'
'radiance in the sun and the moon,' 'OM in all Vedas,'
'sound in Akasa,' sweet smell in earth,' luminosity in fire,
'manhood in man,' and 'austerity in the austere' --- all
clearly indicate that the Self is that which gives each
individual phenomenon its own existence. In short, as the
stanza declares, the Self is the LIFE IN ALL BEINGS.
AS A MORE VIVID EXAMPLE, FOR THE READY GRASP
OF GROSSER INTELLECTS, THE LORD GIVES THE
FOLLOWING SET OF EXAMPLES:

516

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

10. Know Me, O Partha, as the eternal seed of all beings; I am
the intelligence of the intelligent. The splendour of the splendid
(things and beings) , am I.
Not satisfied with the above enumeration --- which can
truly indicate its full significances only to those who have
a fairly well-developed subtle intellect --- the Lord is
compelled to indicate the same Truth through a set of
more obvious examples. He says in the stanza, "I AM THE
ANCIENT SEED OF ALL BEINGS." Not satisfied with this
statement, as an artist would mix more colours afresh and
paint, again and again, to bring out his theme more
vividly to the perception of the on-lookers, Bhagawan
gives here two more beautiful instances by which we can
get an insight into the relationship between the gross
perceivable matter and the subtle imperceptible Spirit.
I AM THE INTELLIGENCE OF THE INTELLIGENT --The intelligent man constantly expresses a greater amount
of divinity in his thoughts and ideas. In that intelligent
man, the Self is the intelligence, that subtle-power,
because of which the individual is capable of manifesting
such brilliant comprehension. Similarly, it is also said that
the Self is that which beams out through the beautiful and
the energetic.
In other words, through the instrument of our intellect, it
is the Consciousness in us that expresses itself as an
intelligent individual. As a parallel we can say that
517

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

electricity is the "light in the bulb", is the "heat in the
heater", is the "music in the radio."
YET ANOTHER EXAMPLE
FOLLOWING VERSE:

IS

GIVEN

IN

THE

11. Of the strong, I am the strength --- devoid of desire and
attachment, and in (all) beings, I am the desire --- unopposed to
DHARMA, O best among the Bharatas.
Having thus served with different samples the seekers of
the average intelligence and the dullest in this stanza the
Lord is trying to indicate the Eternal Self to the MOST
INTELLIGENT students, who have the capacity to do
subtle reflection upon such philosophical ideologies.
I AM THE STRENGTH IN THE STRONG --- This
statement is evidently as easy of comprehension as the
example given in the previous stanza. But the statement
out-shines the above set of examples when here, Krishna
gives the phrase qualifying "Balam." Generally, an
individual expresses his might and strength only when he
is goaded by his desires or attachments.
Without these two inner urges it is impossible for us to see
any expression of might or strength. Desire (Kama) and
attachment (Raga) are generally considered by students of
Vedic literature as almost synonyms; but Shankara, in his
commentary, has very thoughtfully given us the
518

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

distinction between these two powerful impulses. He says
Kama is 'desire for what is absent' at present in the scheme
of our life, and Raga is 'affection for what one already has.'
These are the two emotions, lashed by which, individuals
or communities, or societies or nations, generally express
their might and strength (Balam). Riots and agitations,
battles and wars, are all ever motivated by these two
dangerous urges. In the subtle definition of the Self, the
Lord brings a new life of thought here for the
contemplation of the seeker. He says, the Self is not merely
the strength in the strong but "I AM THE STRENGTH
DEVOID OF DESIRE AND ATTACHMENT."
As though not satisfied with his own definition, the Lord
gives yet another example. "I AM DESIRE IN BEINGS,
UNOPPOSED TO DHARMA." We have already explained
the term Dharma as the 'LAW OF BEING.' The essential
factor in man is the Divine Consciousness. All actions,
thoughts and ideas entertained by him which are not
opposed to his essential Divine Nature constitute his
Dharma. All actions and thoughts that hasten the evolution
of man to rediscover his essential Divine Nature are
considered righteous action (Dharma), while all activities
of the mind and intellect that take him away from his true
Divine Nature and make him behave like an animal and
degrade him in his evolutionary status, are called
unrighteous behaviour (A-dharma).
With this understanding of the term Dharma, the second
line of the stanza becomes very clear. "ALL DESIRES
519

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THAT ARE NOT UNRIGHTEOUS FOR THE BEINGS,"
therefore means the glorious urge in the EVOLVERS to
meet their own inner weaknesses courageously and bring
out a complete consummation of their evolutionary urge
to seek and to discover the goal of Self-perfection. This is
the subtle power that is indicated here. The Lord says: 'I
am not the Sadhaka, but I am the burning aspiration in
him, to discover and become one with the Immutable Self.'
BY THE ABOVE EXAMPLES, DOES IT MEAN THAT
THE SPIRIT HAS BEEN REALLY CAPTURED AND
JAILED IN BY MATTER? HOW CAN THE LIMITED
LIMIT THE UNLIMITED? LISTEN:
12. Whatever beings (and objects) that are pure, active and
inert, know them to proceed from Me; yet, I am not in them,
they are in Me.
In this stanza, the Lord concludes the topic of His
discussion, which He undertook while commenting upon.
His own statement, "ALL THIS IS STRUNG IN ME AS A
ROW OF PEARLS ON A STRING."
The term Maya, as used in Vedantic literature, is nothing
other than the different impulses under which the mind
and intellect of the living kingdom act. The infinite
varieties of thoughts and ideas that rise in the heart of the
living kingdom have been observed and classified under
the three main moods, governed by which alone do the
520

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

instruments of feeling, thinking and action come to play
their parts everywhere. These three characteristics, the
eternal moods of the "subtle-body," are called 'unactivity'
(Sattwa), 'activity' (Rajas), and 'inactivity' (Tamas).
With this knowledge of the three gunas, as they are called,
when we try to understand the stanza, it becomes very
easy reading. "Whatever states pertain to these three
natural temperaments of the heart and the head, they all
rise from the Self." This is a statement which is only a reinterpretation, in philosophical terminology, of what has
already been explained. The Infinite Consciousness is the
Supreme Reality, the Spirit, upon which matter,
constituting Its lower-nature, is but an APPARENT
experience. They all rise from the Truth, inasmuch as all
the waves rise from the ocean, all mud-pots rise from the
mud, all ornaments made of gold come from gold.
This verse concludes with a beautiful statement which
reads like a conundrum. The use of such arresting
statements is an art deliberately indulged in by Hindu
philosophical writers. It has the charm that invites an
independent, intellectual investigation by the student, all
by himself, upon the declaration, in order that he may find
the sweet secret of its true import and significance.
"STILL, I AM NOT IN THEM, THEY ARE IN ME."
Such a statement would necessarily be false in any
situation because, if A is not B, the latter cannot be in the
former --- if "I am not in them, they CANNOT be in me."
521

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This sweet paradoxical statement clearly indicates that the
relationship between Spirit and matter is not in terms of
cause and its effect, but it is only as a super-imposition of
matter upon the Spirit. Addressing the deluded, the post
can only explain, "the ghost of your vision had risen from
me alone, inasmuch as, I alone lend to it its existence; but
I, the post, am not in the ghost." So, too, shall the ocean
cry, "the waves rise, stay and dissolve away in me; but I
am not in the waves."
As Shankara would have it, the Self declares here that
even though matter depends entirely for its existence
upon the Conscious Principle, yet the Divine Spark is in
no way under the thraldom of matter. Matter ekes out its
existence from the Spirit; but, the Spirit is --- in no way at
no time, howsoever little --- controlled, contaminated, or
shackled by the sad lot of the finite, imperfect matter.
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA, LORD KRISHNA
REGRETS
THAT
THE
WORLD
DOES
NOT
UNDERSTAND HIM IN HIS TRUE NATURE. WHAT IS
THIS IGNORANCE ON THE PART OF THE WORLD
DUE TO? LISTEN:
13. Deluded by these natures (states or things) composed of the
three GUNAS (of PRAKRITI ) all the world knows Me not as
Immutable and distinct from them.

522

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

If there be such a Divine Factor, beyond the usual
cognition of the ordinary mortals, how is it that they are
not in a position to understand, at least the presence, if not
a complete realisation of this great Truth? This question is
answered here in this verse.
DELUDED BY THE MODIFICATIONS OF THE THREE
gunas, the worlds of living creatures become blind to the
divine possibilities in themselves, and live totally a life of
mere identification with the matter-envelopments. The
post is covered by the ghost --- vision for the deluded. It is
a fact that as long as the ghost is viewed, not even a
portion of the post will be available for the perception of
the deluded!
Similarly, identifying with the Maya-products, the Self
comes to play the tragic role of the ego, and the ego, in its
preoccupations with the outer-world and with its idle
imaginations, finds itself incapable of knowing its own
true nature. This play of hide-and-seek --- ourselves with
ourselves in ourselves --- is the strange and mysterious
play of the ego, creating the universal sorrow and the
endless mental squalor therein.
THIS "POWER OF VEILING" IN EVERY ONE OF US IS
DEFINED AND DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA:

523

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

14. Verily, this divine illusion of Mine, made up of GUNAS
(caused by the qualities) is difficult to cross over; those who take
refuge in Me, they alone cross over this illusion.
Lord Krishna himself admits that it is not easy for any
ego-centric individual to transcend this delusion in
himself which is caused by "My Maya." If a doctor were to
come and diagnose a disease and declare that there was
no cure for it, nobody will have the faith to follow that
doctor's prescription and advice carefully and cheerfully.
Similarly here, if Krishna's diagnosis of the world's
sorrows and problems is to be defined by the term Maya,
and if the Doctor of the Universe declares that this Mayadisease is difficult to cure, nobody would faithfully follow
such a sad pessimistic philosophy.
Krishna realises these defects and therefore, immediately
removes any such misconception from the minds of the
students of the Geeta. Sometimes a doctor will have to use
strong words in describing the illness to the patient in
order to bring home to the sufferer the seriousness of his
malady; so too, Krishna is here only bringing home to us,
by a direct merciless thrust, the seriousness of the mental
tragedy into which the Supreme has seemingly fallen, to
become the finite mortal ego! After declaring the
seriousness of the disease and after giving the
prescription, He hastens to guarantee a complete cure for
this painful malady of man.

524

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THOSE WHO DEVOTE THEMSELVES TO ME ALONE
shall cross over their subjective delusion, which has
created for man the objective worlds of sorrows and
imperfections. How to do this has been already explained
while discussing the technique of meditation, in the last
chapter. With single-pointed mind, to contemplate upon
the Self is the direct path; and in order to walk this
narrow-way, the mind is to be made steady and
concentrated, through the processes that have already
been discussed. (in Chapter VI-14).
THEN WHY ALL THOSE WHO MEDITATE UPON
THEE ARE NOT EXPERIENCING THE GLORY?
15 The evil-doers, the deluded, the lowest of men, do not seek
Me; they, whose discrimination has been destroyed by their own
delusions, follow the ways of the demons.
The last stanza talked of those that can successfully
transcend their own subjective delusion, and here,
naturally, Krishna is trying to talk about the negative
nature in those who cannot overcome this delusion to
realise the Divine in themselves. Unless the contrast of
ideas is given, the student will not be in a position to
understand properly what exactly are the mind's
tendencies and appetites that are the true symptoms of
delusion.

525

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

LOW
MEN,
DELUDED
AND
INDULGING
THEMSELVES IN EVIL ACTIONS FOLLOW THE PATH
OF THE DEVIL (ASURA) AND GET DEPRIVED OF
THEIR DISCRIMINATION --- We all know that the
insignia of the higher evolution in man is his rational
intellect, which can discriminate between the good and
the bad, the high and the low, the moral and the immoral.
This discriminative awareness is the subtle instrument by
which individuals are rendered capable of awakening
from the dream of their imperfections to their own
Essential Nature of Absolute Divinity.
This faculty can function effectively only in a bosom that
is unagitated by sense-impulses. The more an individual
misunderstands himself to be only a mere mass of flesh,
and continuously pants for self-gratification through sense
indulgences, the more is he considered a sinner. Sin, in
this sense, is but a devolutionary action which is not
appropriate to the dignity and status of the highest
evolutionary glory in man. Sin can be perpetrated only by
those who have deluded themselves, believing that they
are masses of flesh, with minds hungry for emotional
satisfactions and intellects trying to assert and express
their own ideas. Such people are here called by the Geeta,
as deluded (Moodhah). The way-of-life, in such "deluded
men" (Asura bhava) has been exhaustively described to us
by indicating the opposite good qualities of the "perfect
one" (Daivi bhava), later in the Geeta (XVI-3).

526

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PEOPLE REACH ME THROUGH FOUR DIFFERENT
APPROACHES; LISTEN:
16. Four kinds of virtuous men worship Me, O Arjuna, the
dissatisfied, the seeker of (systematised) knowledge, the seeker of
wealth, and the wise, O best among the Bharatas.
Since the Self is the source of all existence and energy, all
other apparent activities that are seen at the level of
matter, must come from the same great, grand motive
force. Every part of a railway engine is made up of cold
iron, and if the engine can run forward carrying along
with it a train-load of passengers and goods, there must be
something other than iron that is giving it the power to
move. Similarly, when ego-centric deluded men,
considering themselves to be their body or mind or
intellect, act in the world outside, they express a kind of
seeming dynamism through their matter vestures. When
those who are living in the matter-outskirts of the Palace
of Truth, struggle hard to eke out satisfaction and
happiness, fulfilling their desires, they too act invoking all
their energies from the Spirit.
Even when the deluded ego-centres want to live in their
realm of ignorance and sorrows, they must necessarily
invoke the required energy and sentiency from the Pure
Consciousness, the Self. Whether they seek consolation in
moments of distress, or whether they are mere seekers of
satisfaction for the demands of the body, for the urges of
527

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the mind, for the questions of the intellect, or whether
they be mere men of desires, striving hard to fulfil their
desires or to satisfy their emotions --- they all need the
energy to function, the capacity to feel and the ability to
act. This dynamic motive power can reach the inert matter
and vitalise it, only when the Spirit is invoked and
contacted.
This invocation of the required type of energy to flow into
a particular channel and act therein is called prayer
(Bhajana). In all true prayers the ego surrenders itself to
the Spirit with a demand to its Lord to manifest and
function in any given scheme of activity. As an analogy
we may take the example of how we make use of an
electric plug on the wall. The various equipments such as
the fan, or the heater, or the toaster, or the refrigerator --all are in themselves mere iron and steel gadgets which
have no capacity of their own to perform any work. Only
when the electric current is flowing through them, can
these machines serve society.
If I plug a fan into the wall-socket, it is an act where the
fan is, as it were, invoking the dynamic "current" to flow
through it. If the right instrument is contacted with the
"current," I will be served by the required manifestation.
But supposing, in winter, I switch the fan on, I have no
right then to complain that the electricity is cruel to me. If,
unintelligently, I invoke the Truth to play through my
mind which is mal-adjusted with wrong tendencies, the
528

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Spirit flowing through such an instrument can bring about
nothing but sorrows for myself and disturbances to others.
With this scriptural idea that the Self has the total
monopoly of all sentience and life, Krishna says here that
everyone, be he a sinner or a saint, foolish or wise, dull or
energetic, cowardly or courageous, must "invoke Me"
(Bhajana) and "I express Myself through the individual
mental composition as the one who has the above
qualities." "Each individual must approach Me," be it
consciously or unconsciously, ere he can express himself
at the intellectual, mental, or physical level of his
personality.
If everyone must thus invoke the Self in expressing
himself, or in fulfilling his ideas and emotions, then
everyone is "sacred" and "virtuous," for, all of us, without
an exception, are devotees at the Temple of the Spirit.
Lord Krishna, the Self, now expounds how the
numberless persons that reach him with endless prayers,
can all be classified under four distinct groups:(a) Men who are dissatisfied with even the best in life
(Arttah) approach this Life Energy in themselves, for
fighting against and for gaining a total relief from the
spiritual distress that is threatening them in their within.
They turn to Me, the Lord.

529

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

(b) Seekers of knowledge and understanding, from a mere
idle curiosity to study and come to know My Nature, ever
invoke the grace of the Spirit.
(c) All men, throughout their life-time, spend themselves
irresistibly in some field of activity or the other, under the
whip of their desires. Fulfilment of desires is the urge
under which every member of the living kingdom acts
restlessly, all through his lifetime. The inert materials of
the body and intellect cannot act unless the Spirit is
invoked to play through them.
(d) We have yet a rare few, who approach the SANCTUM
SANCTORUM of the Temple of the Spirit, demanding
nothing, expecting nothing, carrying with them only
themselves as their offerings. They offer themselves as an
oblation in a pure spirit of love-inspired total selfsurrender. The only cry in their heart is that the Spirit
should end their sense of separation and accept them back
into the embrace of the Lord, to be made one with Him.
These Jnanis constitute the last type who try to invoke the
Spirit.
OF THESE FOUR TYPES WHICH IS THE BEST?
17. Of them the wise, ever steadfast and devoted to the One,
excels; for, I am exceedingly dear to the wise, and he is dear to
Me.
530

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Comparing and contrasting these four above-mentioned
groups among themselves, the Lord declares here that the
Jnani, who with a steadfast mind, surrenders himself to
the Self, with an integrated heart of total devotion, which
is not dissipated by other parallel aspirations, represents
the best. Single-pointedness of mind can be gained only
when the goal of the meditator is fixed and steady. The
unbroken and all-out aspiration of the seeker to reach his
own Real Nature, the Self, is called single-pointeddevotion (Eka bhaktih).
This is possible only when one withdraws oneself totally
from all other extrovert demands of the lower nature in
him. In the case of a Jnani, therefore, the Spirit is invoked
not for the acquisition of anything, but for the annihilation
of all the self-destructive channels through which his
spiritual dynamism gushes out day-to-day, only to get
wasted on the dry rocks of the world of hallucination.
Naturally, therefore, the Self, as a personification in
Krishna, declares in the Geeta that the Jnanis are the
highest and the best among the living kingdom who reach
the PORTALS OF TRUTH with their individual demands
and aspirations, to experience their final merger in the
Self.
To the truly wise "SUPREMELY DEAR AM I." Love is
measured by the amount of identification the lover has
gained with the beloved. Self-surrender is the tune in
which the song of love is truly sung. Selfessness is the key
in which the duet of love is played. Love demands "giving
531

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

without expecting any return," at all times, in all
circumstances. With this understanding of the nature of
true love, when one tries to understand the attitude of the
Jnani towards the Self, it is true that a Jnani alone knows
how to love wholly, completely.
One-sided love never culminates in any consummation.
Man may approach the Spiritual Centre in himself in an
attitude of discrimination and surrender --- with all his
aspiration and love --- but if it is not reciprocated by the
Spirit, it might become as tragic as the case of the Greek
boy who fell in love with his own reflection. Here, when
Krishna declares, "AND HE IS DEAR TO ME," a great
psychological truth has been expounded. It is the Eternal
Law that love, with no strings attached to it, can not only
order its own fulfilment, but can also convert even the
base into the noble by its silent persuasions and
mysterious charms.
Scientifically viewed, it is an observable fact that if a mind
is powerfully charged with a certain emotion --- be it
sorrow, hatred, jealousy, love or kindness --- it can bring
about sympathetic vibrations of similar emotions in the
chambers of the hearts that come near it. When one full of
hatred approaches us, he can influence and fill our hearts
to the full with hatred. So too, if we can give the required
dose of pure and sincere love, unmotivated by any desire
or selfishness, it is a law that even the bitterest enemies,
with their hearts full of hatred, can be forced to reflect
nothing but love towards us. This psychological truth, in
532

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

all its implications, has been brought out vividly when the
Geeta states that even the Infinite and Eternal Truth has,
helplessly, to come under the charm of pure and selfless
courting of the meditator with Eka bhaktih.
THEN, ARE NOT THE THREE OTHERS, THE
DISSATISFIED AND THE REST, DEAR TO VASUDEVA?
NOT SO. THEN HOW IS IT?
18. Noble indeed are all these, but the wise man, I deem, as My
very Self; for, steadfast in mind he is established in Me alone as
the Supreme Goal.
With the large-heartedness of a master-mind, Lord
Krishna declares here that all creatures living the life of
intelligent seeking and industrious efforts are blessed,
inasmuch as they all are, in their own way, approaching
the same fountain of
the Infinite for tapping out their required energies.
Although some are invoking the Eternal Spiritual Strength
for the purposes of reducing their distress, or for fulfilling
their desires, they all are, for one reason or the other,
approaching the Self, and therefore, relatively, diviner
than the insentient 'mineral world.' However, comparing
and contrasting them with the Jnanis, the Lord says: "BUT,
THE MAN OF KNOWLEDGE, I REGARD AS MY OWN
SELF."
533

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is very well-known that there is a lot of difference
between maintaining one's friendship with the minister,
and oneself becoming a minister. No doubt, to be a friend
of a minister is to gain some amount of influence and
power in society; but the entire might and glory come to
the man when he himself becomes the minister. Similarly,
to be capable of invoking and directing the Spiritual
Strength is certainly divine; but a man of Knowledge is
one who, courting Truth in a spirit of total identification
with It, successfully attains the total transcendence of his
individual
mind-and-intellect,
whereby
his
ego
rediscovers itself to be nothing other than the Self. He
becomes one with It.
Such a Jnani, thereafter, ever remains in the divine sense of
identification with the self. This emphasis of extra
preference to the status of a Man-of-Wisdom, is according
to Krishna, his personal opinion (Matam).
19. At the end of many births the wise man comes to Me,
realising that all this is Vasudeva (the innermost Self) ; such a
great soul (MAHATMA) is very hard to find.
That such pure Men-of-Wisdom are necessarily few in the
history of the world, is the declaration here, which, in
decadent Hinduism, we have learnt to consider as an
extremely pessimistic assertion (VI-45). A little thought
should clearly make the fallacy of this wild conclusion
quite evident to us. The entire human kingdom is, indeed,
534

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

a very negligible and small proportion of the total sentient
creatures in the world. In the community of man, not all
have a fully developed instrument of rational thinking
and divine emotion.
Even among those who have fully developed mental and
intellectual capacities, it is a rare few that seriously take
up the study of the scriptures. All those who STUDY
scriptures do not LIVE the scriptures, but they come to
feel fulfilled in a mere understanding of its contents.
Therefore, it becomes evident that only a rare few can ever
reach the goal of evolution and come to discover their true
Divine Nature of Perfection.
Like Darwin in our own days, the ancient Rishis also had
observed in their times, that this development can take
place only when, in the flood of time, the different
circumstances have rubbed down and polished the
imperfect into the shape and beauty of the perfect. It takes
trillions of years for an organism to evolve from one given
form of existence into a higher form of life. Naturally, it
becomes quite clear that for rational being of subtlest
potentialities, it should take an indefinitely large number
of lives in different manifestations to scrape off all his
ignorance, and thereby, ultimately reach the Perfect Realm
of all Knowledge.
This DOES NOT MEAN that none among us, now striving
so hard, has any chance of reaching the goal of life in this
very birth. It is not in any pessimistic hopelessness and
535

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

total despair, that this statement is made by the Lord in
the Geeta. On the other hand, it is solely for bringing into
the recognition of the student the urgency of his faithful
pursuit of the higher life. The very fact that a seeker has
come to feel a disappointment with his present state of
existence, and the fact that he has discovered enough
intellectual capacity to appreciate and comprehend the
subtle thoughts of the Upanishadic lore, clearly shows that
he has reached the very archway to the temple of the Self.
A little more sincere and steady self-application can take
him to the highest state of his evolution.
NOW IT WILL BE SHOWN WHY THE PEOPLE ARE
NOT GENERALLY AWARE THAT THE SELF, OR
VASUDEVA, ALONE IS THE ALL:
20. Those whose wisdom has been looted away by this or that
desire, go to other gods, following this or that rite, led by their
own nature.
Desire for the sense-objects of the world and the urge for
sense-gratification are the great factors which cloud the
discriminative potentialities in the human intellect. It is
impossible that an individual is not made conscious of his
own Self, in the light of a powerful and strong
discrimination.
Earlier, we were told that the deity for whose propitiation
we performed the Yajna was none other than "the
536

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

productive potential in any given field of activity."
Reading the stanza in the light of this interpretation we
may say that the deity mentioned here denotes nothing
other than the various joys contained in the different
sensuous fields which are courted by us, when we get
lashed by desires, in order that we may gain a complete
and exhaustive satisfaction from them.
Desires are the springs from which thoughts continuously
gurgle up to flood the mental zone, and disturb the
glorious reflection of Truth in it. When the mind is thus
disturbed, the discriminative capacity in the intellect is
rendered dull, and naturally, that individual becomes
incapable of distinguishing in his understanding, the Real
from the unreal. When the brilliance of the human
intellect has been clouded with the vapours of desire, the
owls of negativity and delusory attachments start hooting
in the jungles of that mind.
It is not the mere appearance of desires in the mind that
causes the fall of man. No individual can resist the
compelling charm of the desires rising in his bosom. But
when he comes to identify himself with them, the
thoughts rising in him are directly governed by his
desires. When once a given desire has been identified
with, the desirer himself, unconsciously, comes to lend an
uncontrollable amount of dynamism to the upsurge of the
flood of thoughts.

537

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thoughts themselves are inert matter, inasmuch as they
are the by-product of food, being constituted of the
subtlest aspect of the food consumed. These inert thoughtwaves gather a momentum and force by borrowing their
strength and vigour from the Self, through the
individual's enthusiastic identification with those desires.
The urge of thoughts determines the action. The actor in
the field, for the time-being, is rendered incapable of
discriminating whether the action undertaken can, or
cannot, ultimately bring to him a permanent and an
enduring satisfaction. Drunk with the idea that he will be
at least temporarily appeased, the individual struggles
hard and strives intensively to invoke and propitiate THE
PRODUCTIVE POTENTIAL OF ANY GIVEN FIELD OF
HIS ACTIVITY (DEVATA).
In thus invoking the Devata of a given field, the individual
has to strive in a proper and fitting fashion. The methods
of assembling the required instruments, the techniques of
their application, the time intervals necessary for maturing
the results, and the type of gains accrued from the
different kinds of application... all these differ from field
to field in the world. Therefore, each one will have to
"FOLLOW THIS OR THAT RITE," according to the type of
his desires.
The reason why different persons thus struggle hard so
differently, leaving aside all sincere struggles to realise the
Self, as "VASUDEVA IS ALL THIS," is explained here in
the second line. Each individual helplessly functions in the
538

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

different fields of his temporary fascinations, according to
the mental impressions, gathered in his earlier moments
of activity and thought. To conceive that "the Creator is
putting ideas into each one of us because of which one is
good and another vile," is a philosophy of the defeatist, of
the impotent, of the sluggard. True men of action, with the
daring of a well-developed intellect, can very easily see
through men and their behaviours and come to this bold
conclusion that each man acts as per the schedule,
maintained and ordered by himself, during his own past
actions.
In short, a deluded person strives hard, running after the
mirage of sensuality, vainly hoping to gain therein a
satisfaction that is at once infinite and immortal, while
another is found to have the subtle discrimination to
discover for himself the hollowness and futility of sensepursuit. This latter type withdraws from all these
ultimately unprofitable fields, and with avidity seeks the
path to the Real.
WHAT THEN IS THE FUNCTION OF THE ATMAN, THE
GUARDIAN ANGLE IN EACH ONE OF US?
21. Whatsoever form any devotee desires to worship with faith -- that (same) faith of his I make (firm and) unflinching.
In the very opening of this chapter (VII-7), discriminating
the Self from the not-Self, it was shown how Krishna is the
539

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Spiritual Principle, the Common Truth that holds together
the multiple universe of names and forms. It was also said
(VII-14) that the three-fold mental temperaments (gunas),
that work up the "divine illusion," hoodwink the
individual from right cognition of the Divine Self within
him. But for the Conscious Principle thrilling the inert
matter walls that seemingly encircle the spirit, neither our
physical, nor mental, nor intellectual personalities can
ever come to function, as they do now. It is very wellknown that all men do not worship at the same altar. Each
one approaches the same Truth by worshipping the idol of
his own heart. Krishna here declares the sacred truth that
in all Churches, Mosques, and Temples, in public places,
or in private institutions, in the open, or on the sly, in the
quiet huts, and in the silent caves --- wherever and in
whatsoever form, any devotee seeks to worship with
Shraddha, "HIS FAITH DO I MAKE UNWAVERING." A
faithful follower of the Geeta can never be contaminated
by sectarianism or intolerance. At the foot of every altar, it
is Krishna, the Self, that constantly supplies more and
more faith to water the expanding fields of devotion in the
sincere devotees.
Applying this general statement to the subjective worship
in the human bosom, we can very easily understand the
greater import of this stanza.
In the world outside, it is very well-known that the greater
the consistency with which an idea or an attachment is
maintained by an individual, the greater does he become
540

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

fixed in that temperament or relationship. The more often
a particular type of thought is entertained in the mind, the
deeper becomes that thought channel, strengthening that
very mental impression. These deep-cut patterns of
thought, ploughed along the valleys of the mind, indicate
the pattern of desires which the individual had
entertained. In the law that governs this psychological
rule, we can spy and detect the Spiritual Reality and Its
infinite and glorious might.
In short, the Lord says that "as we think so we become,"
and the more we become, the more we think in the same
given pattern. Applying this principle of psychology, it
becomes clear, beyond all doubts, why everyone of us is
bound by our own habits, and how we get chained by our
own peculiar type of thinking. The sensuous are not to be
condemned, and equally so, the divine need not be
congratulated! Both of them are the exact products of their
individual types of thinking. Thought belongs to the
realm of nature (Prakriti); thoughts create the world and
the all-pervading Self is the Essential Substratum
(Purusha) that provides the world-drama with its stage
and scenario.
WITH THIS EVER-GROWING FAITH, HOW DOES THE
MAN-OF-THE-WORLD GAIN HIS PARTICULAR
DESIRE?

541

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

22. Endued with that faith, he engages in the worship of that
'DEVATA' and from it he obtains his desire-fulfilments; all
these being ordained, indeed, by Me (alone) .
Imbued with this faith he invokes the Devata of his choice
and gains the fulfilment of his desires. And, Lord Krishna
adds that in all cases these desires are "BEING VERILY
DISPENSED BY ME ALONE." The Self is the source of all
activities, gains, fulfilments and despairs. The sense of joy
or sorrow, of success or failure, is but a mental thoughtwave; but for the Conscious principle illumining it, we
would not have any such experience.
Faithful activity in any given field of action, brings about
complete success, but the very existence of the field, the
capacity to act, the fervour of faith that supplies
consistency to all efforts --- all these are possible only in
the medium of the Changeless, the Actionless, the
Attributeless, Eternal Self. And Krishna, identifying
Himself with this Spiritual Centre of the Universe, rightly
declares here, that He alone is the one that supplies an
ever-growing faith in all activities, and ultimately, when
the laws of action are fulfilled to the last bit, both in their
intensity and application, it is He alone who dispenses the
exact result of each action.
When a well-adjusted radio is plugged onto the current,
the Electric Current says that it alone is the 'dispenser' of
the programme available at the Station for the listeners!
542

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SINCE THE DELUDED ONES DESIRE THE FINITE
SENSE OBJECTS, THEY DO NOT COME TO THE ALLSATISFYING PEACE; AND HENCE, IT IS SAID:
23. Verily the "fruit" that accrues to those men of littleintelligence is finite. The worshippers of the DEVAS go to the
DEVAS but My devotees come to Me.
The fruits accruing to "THESE MEN OF LITTLE
UNDERSTANDING ARE LIMITED." Fleeting desires for
finite objects, even when fulfilled through the
impermanent activities, must surely prove to be
ephemeral. Out of gold whatever ornament is made, it
also must be gold alone; when chocolate is made out of
sweet things, the resultant stuff cannot be bitter. The
effects entirely depends, for their nature and quality, upon
those of the causes.
Finite actions undertaken in finite fields, employing finite
instruments, cannot but produce --- whether joy or sorrow
--- finite "fruits." Joy arrested or ended is sorrow; and
therefore, in each instance of a sensuous desire satisfied,
though there is a joy and a fulfilment, the sense-ofsatisfaction soon putrefies to provide the sourness of
dissatisfaction, or more often, the bitterness of sorrow.
This statement of the Lord is supported by the following
general rule that, "THE WORSHIPPERS OF THE DEVAS
REACH THE DEVAS." Those who are invoking a desired
543

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

'profit potential,' in any given field of activity, can, even
when completely successful, gain only THAT profit.
The above statement is declared as a contrast to a pure
philosophical truth, when the Lord, says: "THOSE WHO
DEVOTE THEMSELVES TO ME, COME TO ME." Seekers
of happiness in the world of sense-objects, as a result of
their strife and struggle, can gain their insignificant
success in the field of sense-enjoyments. If the same effort
is applied by them in the right life of constructive living,
they can come to discover their identity with the Eternal
Absolute, the Self. Due to the extrovertedness of the
deluded ego, it comes to identify itself with its finite
matter-envolopments, and revels in a world of its endless
number of objects, called in Sanskrit as the Jagat.
Discriminative and careful seekers, understanding the
utter uselessness of the pursuit of finite pleasures, detach
themselves from their false ego-centric lives, and through
the process of meditation upon the Self, as advised in the
previous chapter, come to rediscover their own Real
Nature in the sunny fields of Bliss that lie unrolled beyond
the thorny by-lanes of all physical, psychological and
intellectual quests.
In the language of the Geeta, the first person singular
stands always, at all places, for the Infinite Reality which
is the Substratum for the individual as well as for the
whole. Therefore, "MY DEVOTEES COME TO ME," is not
the assertion of a limited historical figures as the son of
544

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Devaki, but the Singer of the Geeta, in His divine
inspiration, entirely identifies Himself with the Principle
of Consciousness that is the core of the pluralistic dream
of the mind-intellect equipment. Thus, to understand the
above statement, without its seeming limitations, is to
understand the Geeta, the Scripture of Man, as declaring
that the seekers of the Self discover themselves and
become the Self.
THEN WHY DO PEOPLE IN GENERAL FAIL TO
REACH THE SELF? LISTEN:
24. The foolish think of Me, the Unmanifest, as having come to
manifestation, not knowing My higher, immutable and peerless
nature.
Men who lack discrimination and the capacity to perceive
the subtle Truth that shines in and through the vast
disturbances of the endless plurality, fail to realise the
immutable and the peerless Self. In their extreme
preoccupation with the ever-changing glory of the
perceivable, the Prakriti, (VII-4 and 6) they do not
understand that "ALL THIS IS STRUNG IN ME AS A
ROW OF PEARLS ON A STRING."
This fundamental Reality, that is the beam of brilliance in
which like dust-particles the Universes dance about, is
termed as the "Unmanifest." This term is to be understood
in all its philosophical implications. That which is called
545

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the MANIFEST is available either for the perceptions of
the sense-organs, or for the feelings of the mind, or for the
understanding of the intellect. That which is not available
for any one of these instruments of cognition, feeling or
understanding is considered as the UNMANIFEST.
The Self, indeed, should then be considered as the
UNMANIFEST, for it is the VITALITY behind the senseorgans, the FEELER --- potential in the mind and the very
LIGHT that illumines the intellect.
The distorted intellects of the extroverts, in their
miscalculations, come to the false judgement that the
physical glory of the Prophet, or of the incarnation, is all
that is the Eternal Truth. The point-of-concentration
(Upasya) is to be considered, no doubt, as the symbol of
the Truth which the devotee is seeking, but it cannot IN
ITSELF be the Truth. If it were the Truth, then after
carving out an idol, or after approaching a Guru, the
devotee has nothing more to do, since he has gained the
Truth! Idol worship is only a convenience for gathering
true concentration, for getting an initial momentum for
the final flight into themselves, to reach the Self and
discover therein their own oneness with It.
This stanza gives us a clear insight into the futility of
mistaking the bottle for the medicine, the physical form
for the Guru, the idol for the God! All white-wood is not
the fragrant sandal-wood. Any bright light high up in the
sky, however resplendent it might be, is not a star. Some
546

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

men of incomparable foolishness may come to declare that
the light from a tower is the Sun, but no wise man of the
town will accept it. The idea of Divine Incarnation is
accepted in Hinduism, and according to its theory,
EVERYONE IS AN INCARNATION-TO-A-DEGREE! The
same Truth pervades all, and is in each. It expresses
through the enveloping layers of the mind-and-intellect.
The clearer the mind and the purer the intellect, the
greater is the effulgence of the Divine that beams out
through them.
When the Self in anyone beams out through the steadied
and purified mind and intellect completely sublimating
his lower nature (Prakriti), he becomes a Prophet, a Sage.
Krishna, Rama, Christ, Mohammed, Buddha, Mahavira
are some of the examples. These Men-of-realisation,
discovering their Self, understood and lived every
moment of their lives in the Self, as the Self of all. To
mistake their physical structure, or the lingering traces of
their mind, or the film of their intellectual personality, for
the very Essence of Truth, which these God-men were, is
to make as miserable a mistake as taking the waves to be
the ocean!
Naturally, therefore, Krishna uses here a severe term, to
indicate such deluded men of superstitious false
understanding, as "UNINTELLIGENT FOOLS" (ABuddhayah).

547

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHAT CAUSES THIS PREVALENT IGNORANCE OF
THE TRUE NATURE IS EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
25. I am not manifest to all (in My Real Nature) veiled by
Divine- 'MAYA. ' This deluded world knows not Me, the
Unborn, the Imperishable.
If there be such a glorious Essential Truth, which is the
core of everything, why is it that it is not freely known and
experienced by everyone at all times? In short, "what
stands between me and my Self?" Why is it that we behave
as though we are but limited ego-centric entities,
incapacitated as we are, to comprehend that in essence we
are the Infinite, the Immortal? These questions are
unavoidable to an intelligent seeker, when he, in his
aspirations, comes face to face with the staggering
revelations contained in Vedanta.
THIS DELUDED WORLD KNOWS ME NOT, THE
UNBORN AND THE IMMORTAL because their own
"ILLUSION, BORN OUT OF THE THREE 'GUNAS,'
VEILS ME." "Maya" is the most difficult theme of all for
elementary students of Vedanta, when they try merely to
understand this Science of Life objectively. The moment a
student tries to experiment with this "Knowledge" upon
himself subjectively, the explanations contained in the
theory become evident. Maya is the conditioning through
which, when the Non-dual Truth expresses Itself, the One
548

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Reality seems to fan out as the spectrum of the multiple
universe.
The principle of Maya functioning in the individual is
termed ignorance (Avidya). This subjective malady, which
provides in its wake, the dreamy hallucinations of a
sorrowful world of change and imperfections, has been
very closely observed, and the Rishis of old have declared
that it is caused by three types of "moods" in man's inner
personality. These three temperaments (gunas), called
Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas, provide a prism, viewed through
which, the kaleidoscopic world seems to dance, flashing
its infinite patterns. Rajas creates 'mental-agitations"
(Vikshepa), and Tamas creates the "intellectual-veiling"
(Avarana).
To him who becomes confused and confounded by the
play of these triple temperaments, the Self is not available
for direct experience. Special instructions from teachers
and diligent practice on the part of students are both
necessary in order to make one realise one's own Real
Nature. To an ignorant man of the jungle, electricity is
unmanifest in the bulb and in its incandescent filament. In
order to perceive the electrical current that flows through
the equipment, theoretical knowledge and experimental
confirmation are essential. After having gained the
knowledge of the electrical energy and its properties,
when the student happens to see the very same bulb, he
comes to cognise through the perceived bulb the
imperceptible, the unmanifest electrical energy!
549

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Similarly, when through self-control, listening, reflection,
and meditation, the agitations of the mind are quietened,
and when the veiling has been pulled down, the seeker rediscovers "ME THE UNBORN, THE IMMUTABLE." As
long as the agitations of the mind veil the intellect from its
awareness of the Self, so long the limited ego (Jeeva) pants
to fulfil itself and to gain the Infinite among the gutters of
its sensual cravings!
Such frenzied hearts reeking with desires and lacerated
with disappointments, crushed by dissatisfactions and
smothered by the fear of their own annihilation --- can
never have the integrated equipoise to live even a moment
of still-awareness to experience the Pure Consciousness.
"THE DELUDED WORLD KNOWS ME NOT" as it is
steeped in "THE ILLUSION BORN OUT OF THE THREEFOLD gunas." Screened off by this universe of names and
forms, which is but an apparent projection of the Self, the
sense-organs, mind or intellect fail to perceive It. The
ghost veils the post! The mirage-waters clothe the desert!!
The waves screen off the ocean!!!
THE PRESENT CONDITION OF IGNORANCE AND
CONFUSION IN THE LIMITED FINITE EGO IS
BROUGHT OUT VERY VIVIDLY IN THE FOLLOWING,
BY CONTRASTING IT AGAINST THE BACK-GROUND
OF THE SELF, WHICH IS OF THE NATURE OF ALL
KNOWLEDGE:

550

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

26. I know, O Arjuna, the beings of the past, and present and
the future, but no one knows Me.
The idea that God is Omniscient is common to all religions
of the world, but a satisfactory explanation of this concept
is given only in Vedanta. In the Geeta too --- as a Bible of
the Hindu religion, as a hand-book of easy reference for
the students of the Upanishads --- we find a wider hint as
to what we mean by the Omniscience of the Self.
The Self, as the Pure Consciousness, is the illuminating
principle that brings the entire field of the mind and
intellect under the beam of Its clear awareness. Even the
world-of-objects is brought within our understanding
only when it enters, through the sense-organ-doors, and
reaches the mental lake, and makes therein its
characteristic thought-waves;
the thought-waves make the intellect function in
classifying and determining them. Both these mental and
intellectual disturbances are illumined for us by the everwakeful Consciousness, the Self in us.
Sunlight illuminates all the objects of the world. When my
eyes or ears illumine a given form or sound, I say that I
see or hear that particular form or sound. In short, to be
aware of a thing is to know that thing; and to know is to
illumine. Just as the Sun can be considered as the "eye of
the world," inasmuch as without the Sun all organs-ofvision will be blind apertures, so too, the Self can be
551

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

considered as the knower of everything, in everyone, at all
times, and in all places. This Omniscience of the Supreme
is vividly hinted at here, when Krishna declares, "I KNOW
THE BEINGS OF THE PAST, OF THE PRESENT, AND
OF THE FUTURE."
It must be noted that the Eternal Self is not only the
Awareness that lights up all bosoms at this present
moment, but it was the awareness that illumined the
objects, feelings and thoughts in all bosoms from the
beginningless beginning of creation and it shall be the
same Principle behind every knower that knows anything
in all the future generations till the endless end of time!
Electricity revolves the fan; but the fan can never fan the
electricity! The gazer surveys the heavens through a
telescope, but the telescope can never survey the gazer!
The Conscious Principle vitalises the food-made mind and
intellect and makes them capable of feeling and thinking.
Without the Self dynamising them, they are incapable of
sense-perceptions; but neither the mind, nor the intellect,
can perceive, feel, or comprehend the Subjective Principle,
the Self. The Lord declares here that, though he knows
everything, at all times, in all places, He is known by none
at any place or at any time --- "BUT ME NONE KNOWS."
According to the strictest Vedantic philosophy, the Self is
not a "knower," just as in the strictest logic of thought it
would not be correct to say that the Sun "illumines" the
world. From our standpoint, contrasting with the hours of
552

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

night when things are not illumined, we may rightly
attribute the function of illuminating things during the
day to the 'principle of light' called the Sun. However,
from the standpoint of the Sun, which is ever brilliant,
there is no moment when he is not blessing the objects
with his shining touch. Therefore, it is as meaningless to
say that the Sun "illumines" the objects, as to say that "I am
too busy now-a-days breathing"!
'Knower-hood' is a status gained by Self when It functions
through the equipment of Maya; and the Self, that
functions in and through delusory Maya, is called the
God-principle, termed in the Vedantic literature as Ishwara.
Here Krishna is pictured by Vyasa as the divine
embodiment of Truth, and an Incarnation of the Self, and
therefore, it is perfectly right if He arrogates to Himself
the nature of Omniscience and declares Himself as "THE
KNOWER OF EVERYTHING IN ALL THE THREE
PERIODS OF TIME."
But unfortunately, an ego-centric mortal viewing the
universe through the pin-hole of his congested,
constricted and limited mind-and-intellect, fails to see the
harmonious rhythm in the macrocosm. He who can rip
open his own self-made bondages of ignorance and rise to
attune himself with the macrocosm, can certainly come to
experience the Krishna view-point. Anyone who
successfully comes to live thus in unison with the cosmic
mind, is the Krishna of that age and for ever thereafter.
553

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IF THE SELF IS THE ETERNAL KNOWER OF ALL
CONDITIONED-KNOWLEDGE, THEN, WHAT VEILS
THIS ESSENTIAL NATURE FROM OUR REALISATION?
LISTEN:
27. By the delusion of the pairs-of-opposites arising from desire
and aversion, O Bharata, all beings are subject to delusion at
birth, O Parantapa (scorcher of foes) .
A highly scientific and extremely subtle philosophical
truth has been suggested in this stanza. In his attempt to
explain why and how the ego-centric personality in man
fails to cognise His all-full nature, the Lord touches, by
implication, the very fundamentals discovered and
discussed by modern biologists in explaining the
evolution of organisms. The instinct of self-preservation is
the most powerful urge under which the individualised
ego tries to live its life of continuous change. This instinct
of preservation expresses itself in the intellectual zone as
binding desires for things that contribute to the
continuous welfare and well-being of the individual's
mundane existence.
When the impulse of desire, flowing from a bosom
towards an object of attachment, gets half-way bumped
upon an object or a being that stands between the bosom
that craves and the object-of-craving, the refracted desirethoughts express themselves as aversion (II-52, 53). In the
tug-of-war between these two forces of desire and
554

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

aversion, the hapless ego gets torn asunder and comes to
suffer the agonising pain of lynching tensions within.
Naturally,
its
mind-and-intellect
become
fully
preoccupied with its pursuits of the things of its desire,
and with its efforts at running away from the objects of its
aversion. Soon the ego-centric personality becomes
endlessly preoccupied, totally confused and completely
exhausted. The host of thought-disturbances that are
thereby created in the mental, and in the intellectual
zones, breed among themselves and add day by day to the
chaos within. The 'agitation' (Vikshepa) is that which veils
(Avarana) the Truth from the direct cognition of the
individual.
Therefore, the only way by which we can come to
rediscover our equipoise and tranquillity as the Eternal
Self, is to arrest, control and win over the agitations of the
mind. All spiritual practices in all religions of the world
are techniques --- either emotional, or intellectual or
physical --- that aim at bringing about at least one solitary
moment of perfect mental poise. Such a moment of poise
is the moment of perfect mental illumination, the
auspicious hour of Self-re-discovery and fulfilment of the
reunion.
But unfortunately, adds the Lord in a divinely pathetic
note, "ALL BEINGS FALLS INTO THIS DELUSION AT
THEIR VERY BIRTH." This is not a pessimistic submission
as to the sorrowful destiny of a man, to escape from which
he is incapacitated from birth. Unlike the Christ-religion,
555

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

our Krishna-religion does not conceive a man as "a child
of sin." The Master-optimist, the Teacher of Hope, the
Joyous Dancer of the Jamuna banks, is expressing here
only a philosophical truth, that the very birth of an
individual into a given embodiment, with its available
environment, is the tragedy that he himself had planned
out elaborately for the fulfilment of his own deep cravings
and secret desires.
To get out of these delusions and gain the right
knowledge constitutes the Sacred Goal of Life, and the
Geeta is the Song of the Self that enchants the erring souls
away from their confusions to the inviting fields of the
joyous Perfection.
TO SHOW THEN WHAT THE QUALIFICATION OF
THOSE WHO SEEK THE TRUTH ARE, THE
FOLLOWING IS GIVEN:
28. But those men of virtuous deeds whose sins have come to an
end, who are freed from the delusion of the pairs-of-opposites
and steadfast in vows, worship Me.
"MEN OF VIRTUOUS DEEDS," as a result of their actions,
"COME TO CLEANSE THEIR SINFUL NATURE" --- is a
declaration that needs to be correctly understood. Sin is
not the nature of man; according to Vedanta, it is only the
tarnish that has come to dim the brilliance of the Self, due
to an error of judgement in the individual. The craving of
556

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the mind-and-intellect, to live in subservience to the calls
and appetites of the grosser outer world, is the root-cause
for the negative values entertained by us, which
ultimately result in 'sins.' He is called a sinful-person in
whom his body makes the heaviest calls on his time and
attention. In such a person, the body becomes the
dominant partner, and it 'enslaves' the self. An extrovert
life --- a life spent in pursuing the satisfaction of his
sensuous desires, to comfort and console every one of his
paltry emotions --- is the way of the sinful.
Such a passionate animal-life leaves gross impressions
upon the mind and intellect. Impressions (vasanas) decide
the future flow of thoughts. As the thoughts, so the
actions, and the action deepen the vasanas.
To break this 'vasana-thought-action' chain which is now
digging the grave of the individual's peace and
tranquillity, it is advised that he start a new life of
meritorious actions. Merit (punya) is a contrast to sin (papa)
and therefore, it is constituted of actions, feelings and
thoughts, dedicated to the godly and the divine. All
introvert actions undertaken in the cognition of "THE
SELF I AM," would create in their wake new impressions.
In the long run, the patterns of sin that existed in the
bosom are wiped out and new divine designs are created
therein.
Such a prepared mind-intellect, from which almost all its
negativities have been rubbed off is "FREE FROM THE
557

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DELUSION OF THE PAIRS-OF-OPPOSITES." It then
becomes an instrument that can, with a single-pointed
steadfastness and firm resolve, meditate upon the Self.
WHAT WOULD BE THE MOTIVE IN THE HEART OF
THOSE WHO ARE THUS MEDITATING UPON THE
SELF AFTER THEIR MINDS HAVE BEEN READJUSTED
BY LIVING THE LIFE-DIVINE? LISTEN:
29. Those who strive for liberation from old age and death,
taking refuge in Me --- They realise in full that BRAHMAN,
the whole knowledge of the Self and all action.
Those who thus strive diligently to cleanse their hearts of
their wrong tendencies and bring their minds so purified
for higher contemplation upon the Self, do so in order to
gain "FREEDOM FROM OLD AGE AND DEATH." But
the modern world is also striving to discover methods of
arresting death and avoiding old age. However, this
physical continuity of existence in the world is not the
goal that has been hinted at here in the Science of spiritual
evolution.
Birth, growth, disease, decay and death are the natural
modifications that come to every man, or being, living in a
given manifestation to the ripe old age of its full existence.
Such modifications as experiences of change are the
agonising sources of all pains in life. But for this change, a
complete and unbroken happiness could be our lot. The
558

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

attempt of a spiritual seeker, in his meditation upon the
Self, is to get over all his identifications with the realm of
change, and the entire province of change is indicated by
these two familiar terms "OLD AGE AND DEATH."
Such a true meditator, meditating upon the Self, comes to
realise his identity with the Conscious Principle in him,
the Self. The Self in the individual (Atman) is the Eternal
Truth, which is the Substratum for the whole universe
(Brahman). To realise the Self is to become Brahman, since
the Self in the individual is the One Self everywhere. This
non-duality of the Truth is implied here in this stanza
when it declares that "THOSE WHO MEDITATE UPON
ME, THE SELF, COME TO 'KNOW BRAHMAN."
That the man of realisation is not therefore an impotent
fool in worldly transactions, has been clearly brought out
here, when Krishna says that the Perfected One not only
realises the All-pervading Self, but at once comprehends
"THE WORKING OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL FORCES
(ADHYATMA) IN HIM AND BECOMES PROFICIENT IN
ALL ACTIVITIES (KARMA)." It is very well realised by all
men of experience, that he alone can serve the world who
has a full and complete knowledge of the psychology of
the world, and also has a perfect control over his own
mind. A man of harmonious perfection is the fittest
instrument to sing the Song of Truth, and such an
individual must be the best integrated personality, smart
and efficient in all activities.
559

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

CONTINUING THE SAME IDEA AND EXPRESSING
HOW A MAN OF WISDOM IS A MAN OF ALL
KNOWLEDGE AND ALL EFFICIENCY, KRISHNA
DECLARES:
30. Those who know Me with the ADHIBHUTA (pertaining to
elements; the world-of-objects) , ADHIDAIVA (pertaining to
the gods; the sense-organs) and the ADHIYAJNA (pertaining
to the sacrifice; all perceptions) , even at the time of death,
steadfast in mind, know Me.
Not only that the man of realisation understands all the
vagaries of the mind and the nature of all activities, but he
also gains a perfect knowledge of the world-of-objects
(Adhibhuta), the secrets behind the workings of the senseorgans, mind, and intellect (Adhidaiva), and the conditions
under which all perceptions --- physical, mental and
intellectual (Adhiyajna) can best take place.
The common idea that a man-of-God is an impractical
man, inefficient to live a successful life in the world, may
be true as far as a dedicated devotee of a particular godform, or a prophet, is concerned. The Upasaka is one who
is so fully engrossed with his emotions and thoughts,
dedicated to the Lord of his heart, that he has neither the
interest nor the capacity to know the ways of the world.
But the man-of-Perfection, as conceived by the Science of
Vedanta, is not only a man of experience in the realm of
Spirit, but he is also, at all times, on all occasions, under all
560

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

situations, a master of himself, and a dynamic force to be
reckoned with.
He essentially becomes the leader of the world, as he is a
master of his own mind, as well as the minds of the entire
living kingdom. To him, thereafter, everything becomes
clear, and such a Man-of-Perfection lives in the world as
God in his Knowledge of the worlds, both within and
without.
In short, the chapter closes with a total assertion that "HE
WHO KNOWS ME KNOWS EVERYTHING"; he is the
man who will guide the destinies of the world, not only in
his own times, but in the days to come, as Lord Krishna
Himself did.
These two closing stanzas of this chapter do not of
themselves explain all the terms used in them. They
represent a summary of the following chapter. In a Shastra
this is one of the traditional methods in the art of
connecting two consecutive chapters together. In the form
of mantras, these two stanzas indicate the contents and the
theme of the following chapter.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the Scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Shri Krishna and Arjuna, the seventh
discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE
AND WISDOM
561

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Vedantic ideologies, preached in the Upanishads had
become, by the time of Vyasa, mere speculative narrations
of poetic perfection, divorced from the actualities of life.
The Hindus, thus estranged from the essential glory and
strength of their culture, were to be resurrected by
showing them the particular beauty and fire that lie
concealed in the philosophical speculations. In this
chapter, Krishna has emphasized and indicated beyond all
doubt, how Vedantic perfection can be achieved and lived
to the glory of the successful seeker and to the blessing of
the generation in which he lives. It is most appropriate,
therefore, that the chapter is entitled "THE YOGA OF
KNOWLEDGE AND WISDOM."
Mere knowledge is of no particular use. Wisdom is the
glow that knowledge imparts to the individual. The
fulfilment of knowledge in an individual is possible only
when he becomes a Man-of-Wisdom. Knowledge can be
imparted, but Wisdom cannot be given. The philosophical
portion of all religions provides the knowledge, the
instructional section of all religions provides techniques
by which knowledge can be assimilated and digested into
the very texture of the devotees' inner lives, and thereby
every religion seeks to create Men-of-Wisdom, who have
fulfilled their lives, justified their religion, and blessed
their generation.
Om Om Om Om Om

562

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 8
Akshara Brahma Yoga
The Yoga of Imperishable Brahman
Arjuna said: 1. What is that BRAHMAN? What is the
ADHYATMA ? What is 'action' ? O best among men, what is
declared to be the ADHIBHUTA? And what is ADHIDAIVA
said to be?
2. Who, and how, is ADHIYAJNA here in this body, O
destroyer of Madhu? And how, at the time of death, are you to
be known by the self-controlled?
The new technical terms, used all of a sudden in the last
two stanzas of the previous chapter (the Essential Being,
the Essential Deity, the Essential Sacrifice etc.), which are
to be known so that such Men-of-Wisdom "CONTINUE
TO KNOW ME EVEN AT THE TIME OF DEATH
STEADFAST IN MIND" (VII-30) confuse Arjuna.
The chapter opens with the seeker questioning his teacher
with a view to get an exact definition for each new term
563

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

used in His learned discourse. Not only does Arjuna ask
for an explanation of the terms used, but he is also anxious
to know how exactly one can realise the Self at the time of
death, when one gains perfect self-control as a result of
one's constant spiritual practices in life.
THE LORD EXPLAINS EACH TERM EXHAUSTIVELY
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
The Blessed Lord said: 3 . BRAHMAN is Imperishable, the
Supreme; His essential nature is called Self-knowledge, the
creative force that causes beings to spring forth into
manifestation is called "work. "
4. ADHIBHUTA (or elements) constitutes My perishable
nature, and the Indweller (or the essence) is the
ADHIDAIVATA; I alone am the ADHIYAJNA here, in this
body, O best of the embodied.
IMPERISHABLE IS THE SUPREME BRAHMAN --- The
term Brahman indicates the one changeless and
imperishable subjective Essence behind the phenomenal
world. It becomes the Self, the Conscious Principle which
illumines the body, mind and intellect, during all their
pilgrimages from birth to death through the infinite
varieties of their vicissitudes.
ITS PRESENCE IN EACH INDIVIDUAL BODY IS
CALLED ADHYATMA --- Though the Self is formless and
subtle, and therefore, all-pervading, Its glory and might,
564

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

power and grace, are felt, experienced and lived by each
physical structure; and this Self, expressing Itself through
a given embodiment, as though conditioned by it, is called
the Adhyatma. Shankara brings it out very clearly when he
explains the term as, "THE PRINCIPLE THAT GRACES
ALL BODIES AS THEIR ESSENTIAL SELF."
Work is not only the turn-over; the turn-over can be
ordered and brought about by sheer labour. The term
'work' connotes something deeper, subtler, diviner. The
creative urge that is behind every active intellect, which
ultimately fulfils itself in the creation of things and beings,
that subtle spiritual strength is called "karma"; all else is
mere sweat and toil, dust and blood, heaving and sobbing,
smiling and singing, hoarding and wasting.
THE ADHIBHUTA IS THE PERISHABLE EXISTENCE --As a contrast to the Imperishable (Akshara) is the
'perishable-equipment' (Kshara), the world of prakriti,
through which the potential dynamism, vigour and glory
of the Infinite Self express themselves. Between the Kshara
and Akshara, there is as much difference as between a
steam-engine and the steam, a running car and the horsepower in the petrol, a singing radio and the electric
current that makes it possible for the radio to sing. In
short, by the term 'perishable' (kshara) the whole world of
phenomena of the Universe is indicated. Subjectively, the
equipments of cognition, feeling, and perception
constitute, in the main, the destructible or the perishable
factors in us.
565

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ADHIDAIVA IS THE INDWELLER --- The term Indweller
(Adhidaiva) is used to indicate the "special faculty" that
presides over each apparatus of knowledge and activity in
the living creatures (the Purushah). The presiding deities of
the sense-organs, of the mind, and of the intellect, are
called the Devatas, which are nothing other than the
faculty of vision in the eyes, the faculty of audition in the
ears, the power of smelling in the nose, and so on.
Adhiyajna, HERE IN THIS BODY, I ALONE AM --- We
have already seen that the Yajna here means the "act of
perception, feeling, or thought." As in the Yajna, here also
oblations --- the sense-objects --- are poured into the Yajnaaltar --- the sense-organs --- when the Devata --- the
particular faculty in it --- gets propitiated and invoked,
and as a blessing from it we gain the "fruit" thereof, viz.,
the knowledge of the perception. In this Adhiyajna, in the
subjective Yajna-act of perception, it is quite evident that
the One Vital Factor that dominates the entire activity is
the Self, the Principle of Life.
By giving these definitions, the Lord is on the whole
suggesting with a subtle under-current of the
implications, that the Eternal Self alone is the Real, and
that all else are delusory super-impositions upon it.
Therefore, to know the Self is to know everything and
having known the Eternal as one's own Real Nature, one
is free to act or not to act, and to play or not to play, in any
of the fields of the not-Self.
566

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

An individual who lives in the Awareness of this
Knowledge, ever-conscious of the play of the Self at all
levels of his personality --- physical, mental and
intellectual --- such an individual, naturally, comes to
experience himself as a Divine Witness, observing the
very process of death that clips off layer by layer his selfchosen connections with
the not-Self!
WHAT HAPPENS TO ONE WHO LEAVES THE BODY
IN THE AWARENESS OF THE SELF? LISTEN:
5. And whosoever, leaving the body, goes forth remembering Me
alone, at the time of his death, he attains My being; there is no
doubt about this.
Vyasa is never tired of emphasizing the cardinal
philosophical idea in Vedanta that an individualised ego
continues identifying with a given physical body only so
long as it needs that particular instrument for eking out its
desired quota of experiences. Once it is over, it 'kicks the
bucket,' as it were, and walks off --- forgetting all its
duties, its relationships and its vanities in that particular
existence. At this moment of divorce from a given body it
is logical to believe that its thoughts would be about the
most predominant desire or aspiration in it --- either
gathered in its past embodiments, or acquired in its
present life. The techniques of meditation and devotion
567

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

constitute the art of tutoring the mind to keep in it an
unflickering flame of aspiration, so carefully trimmed and
fed that such a seeker, "AT THE TIME OF DEATH,
MEDITATING ON ME ALONE, GOES FORTH LEAVING
THE BODY."
This last powerful willing, determined by the last thought,
decides its destinies in the future. An ego that lived all its
life, in its ego-centric vanities, identifying Itself with
merely the flesh and ever catering to its appetities, will be
hoarding such sensuous vasanas that it must necessarily
take a form, lower in the evolutionary scale, in order that
its acquired animal instincts may thereby be fulfilled to
the maximum.
On the other hand, when an individual, in his
discrimination, comes to recognise the futility of a
lascivious life, and, therefore, aspires to release himself
from the thraldom of the flesh, he surely moves higher up
on the ladder of evolution when he retires from his
present embodiment. Faithfully following this theory
which is at once logical and reasonable, the Science of Life,
as enunciated in Vedanta, declares that the last thoughts of
a dying man order his future embodiments and their
environments.
Therefore, Krishna insists here that one who leaves the
physical structure with his mind completely turned
towards the Self will, naturally, reach the Eternal and the
568

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Immortal, "THE SUPREME ABODE, reaching which there
is no return" (VIII-21).
BUT THEN, ARE THERE NO ARGUMENTS THAT CAN
CONCLUSIVELY PROVE THE STATEMENT? LISTEN:
6. Whosoever, at the end, leaves the body, thinking of any being,
to that being only he goes, O Kaunteya (O son of Kunti) ,
because of his constant thought of that being.
Declaring this well-thought-out conclusion of the Rishis,
the Self-dedicated thinkers of India, the Lord says
"WHATEVER OBJECT ONE REMEMBERS WHILE
LEAVING THE BODY, THAT ALONE IS REACHED BY
HIM" --- be it a dog or a god.
"As you think so you become" is a theory which is obvious
to every intelligent man even without an explanation from
any philosopher. Thoughts guide all actions, and at any
given moment the run of thoughts in an individual is
governed and ordered by the channel of thinking, which
he himself has ploughed in his bosom with his conscious
and wilful thoughts and actions in the past. Naturally,
therefore, a mental equipment that has been struggling
during its existence in an embodiment to detach from all
its identifications with that embodiment, and to fix itself
in the contemplation of the Real and the Eternal, would be
creating new channels of divine aspirations (Adhyatma
Samskaras). The time of death, when the occupant of the
569

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

body has packed up to quit, is not the moment to decide
or to plan the travel. At such a moment, instinctively, its
thoughts would run through its habitual channels, and the
flight of thoughts at that moment would determine the
direction of the ego's pilgrimage.
THEREFORE:
7. Therefore, at all times, remember Me, and fight, with mind
and intellect fixed (or absorbed) in Me; you shall doubtless come
to Me alone.
No religion can continuously serve the society unless it
gives its faithful followers specific instructions and
guidance on how best to live their day-to-day life. Here is
an instruction which is at once applicable in the secular
fields of living and in the divine realms of life. Here is a
simple instruction by which not only the STANDARD OF
LIVING could be raised but also the STANDARD OF LIFE
could be divinised.
There are many who suspect that this method of splitting
the mind between religion and life is detrimental to true
success in either of them. This, in fact, is a thoughtless
argument. Hardly ever is man's mind totally invested
where his hands function. Ordinarily, a major portion of
the mind, all the time, wanders into the jungles of
dreadful fears, or into the caves of jealousies or into the
deserts of imaginary possibilities of failures. Instead of
570

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

thus wasting the total mental energy and dynamism,
Krishna advises us that a truly successful man, striving to
achieve the highest, both in the outer world of plurality,
and in the realms within, should rest his mind at the
gracious and peaceful feet of Truth. He can then pour out
the entire wealth of his capacities into the work in his
hand, and thereby assure for himself the highest laurels
both here and in the hereafter.
In Hinduism, religion is not divorced from life. If they are
separated, both of them will die away. They are as
intimately connected as the head and the trunk; separated
from the other neither can live. Even while living through
the turmoils of existence, a true seeker must learn to keep
his mind continuously upon the awareness of his Real
Nature and the Substratum of the world in one vast
embrace of blissful homogeneity. This is not difficult, nor
is it impracticable.
An actor, playing the part of a king in a drama, can never
completely forget that he has a wife and a child in his own
house on the outskirts of the city. If he forgets his personal
identity and acts as the king even outside the stage, he
will immediately be segregated, and moved to a lunatic
asylum for the safety of the society! He is efficient as the
actor because he constantly remembers his own real
identity. Similarly, even with continuous cognition of our
Divine Nature, we can act in the world without any
hindrance, and thereby add a glow to our achievements,
571

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and soften the reactions of any disappointments that we
might meet with in life's pilgrimage.
A truly educated man never forgets his education; it
becomes part and parcel of his very nature and in every
thought, word and action of his, he brings out the
fragrance of his education. So, too, the man of constant
Awareness will act in the world as a mastermind --- all his
actions soaked in selflessness, all his thoughts flavoured
with love, and all his feelings matured in kindness. This is
the secret with which the Vedic civilisation enchanted the
world of its time and compelled the adoration of all later
generations.
Krishna is here quite clear when He says that, in the case
of an individual who lives a life of battle to win righteous
profits, and constantly remembers the Lord while doing
so, his "MIND AND INTELLECT GET ABSORBED IN
ME." Following the above (VIII-5, 6) theory of "as you
think so you become," "YOU SHALL COME TO ME,"
when once the mental equipment gets absorbed in the
Self, through the process of constant contemplation on the
Self with single-pointed devotion.
FURTHER:
8. With the mind not moving towards any other thing, made
steadfast by the method of habitual meditation, and constantly
572

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

meditating on the Supreme PURUSHA, the Resplendent, O
Partha, he goes (to Him) .
The term 'death'mentioned here does not mean only the
irrevocable physical death, but also the "death of the ego,"
which is to be brought about through the steady practice
of meditation. This stanza is added to the discourse to
show that after the sublimation of the limited ego, one can
live in full Godly Awareness as a liberated God-man, even
here, while living this very life!
One who is practising the above method of living in the
world, "AS A SOJOURNER THEREIN, AND NOT AS A
NATIVE OF IT," and who is training the mind constantly
to rest upon the contemplation of the Self, becomes singlepointed in his concentration. This, in fact, is a
revolutionary interpretation of the techniques of prayer
and concentration (Upasana) as explained in the Vedas and
also the methods of devotion and surrender championed
in the Puranas, while what is advised in the preceding
stanza is religion lived in the market-place, the everydaySamnyasa for the man of action, in the very fields of his
own activities.
By this practice the devotee develops single-pointedness
of the mind which helps to integrate his intellect. With
such well-tuned up and nobly adjusted instruments of
perception and comprehension, and intuitive realisation
of the Divine, the Self becomes an easy experience:
"DWELLING ON THE SUPREME, RESPLENDENT
573

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PURUSHA, O SON OF PRITHA, ONE GOES TO HIM."
With integrated mind, whatever the individual meditates
upon intensively, he must come to gain it soon enough.
Thus, the stanza indicates an ampler significance than
what has been so far declared. This realisation of the Self,
and thereby gaining one's identity with It, can actually
take place in this very same life, if, with prepared mind
and intellect one can, with steadfastness, meditate upon
Me, "THE SUPREME RESPLENDENT PURUSHA.
The term that has been used to indicate the one who
meditates upon the Self (Anuchintayan) is very significant.
Thoughts of the same species, made to run towards one
fixed ideal or goal, in an unbroken flow, are called
"meditations." The prefix 'Anu' in 'Anuchintayan' provides
this significant meaning of the "continuity" of the flow-ofthought, in one determined channel of contemplation.
WHAT ARE THE SPECIFIC QUALITIES OF THIS GREAT
PURUSHA UPON WHOM WE ARE CONSTANTLY TO
MEDITATE?
9. Whosoever, meditates upon the Omniscient, the Ancient, the
Ruler (of the whole world) , minuter than the atom, the
Supporter of all, of Form inconceivable, Effulgent like the Sun
and beyond the darkness (of ignorance) . . .
By holding the mind constantly in the contemplation of
the Self, the devotee was promised that he could develop
574

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in himself such a powerful and divine trait that at the time
of his departure he can easily come to entertain the
thoughts of the Divine. By a very subtle implication, it was
also suggested in two previous stanzas (VIII-5, 6), that
even while continuing to live in the present embodiment,
the seeker can reach a point where the ego-centric life is
ended. Such a total annihilation of ignorance-created
misconceptions, and the consequent vanities, can be
successfully accomplished by the seekers only when their
minds get totally withdrawn from their attachments to the
false matter-envelopments through the process of
continued contemplation upon the Self.
In the preceding stanza, it was also vaguely hinted that
the contemplation of the Self must be as "THE SUPREME
RESPLENDENT PURUSHA." If I am advised by
somebody to meditate upon or think out the possibilities
of OXYGENELITEEN' it will be impossible for me,
however wise a man I might be, unless I know what that
is. Merely
upon a name, no consistent contemplation is possible.
"OXYGENELITEEN" is merely a word constituted of
letters --- it means nothing; it is only a sound represented
by a few letters of the alphabet. Similarly, to be advised by
a Shastra, to meditate upon the SUPREME
RESPLENDENT SELF, could only be as futile as to be
asked
to
think
over
the
possibilities
of
"OXYGENELITEEN."
575

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In a practical text-book of instruction as to how Vedanta
can be lived, Krishna has to provide Arjuna with sufficient
material indicating the line of contemplation to be
undertaken by the meditator. The two stanzas now under
review, give
an exhaustive design for the students to make themselves
successfully and profitably disciplined.
These qualifying terms are as many different indications
of the Truth (though none defines It), which is the thrilling
core that gives a similitude of life and reality to inert,
unreal matter. No single term here, therefore, is to be
understood as complete in itself. Geometrically, a point
can be defined and indicated only with reference to two
different sets of data. So too, here the inexpressible Reality
has been almost accurately explained with these different
qualifying terms.
Contemplation upon the Reality, through an attempt at
exhaustively comprehending all the secret suggestions in
the above stanza, is to prepare a mental condition in
which, if a mind lives well-integrated and turned inward,
it can come to pause in an atmosphere of Infinite
Experience.
The Conscious Principle, serving as the Soul in an
embodiment, is that which illumines all the thought
waves that rise in that particular mind, functioning in that
given embodiment. The Infinite Self being One
576

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

everywhere, it is the same Principle that illumines all the
different embodiments, all the thought-experiences, at all
times. Just as the Sun is said to be "SEEING
EVERYTHING," because it illuminates all the objects on
the globe, so too, is the Divine Principle of Awareness --the factor without which no knowledge is ever possible.
Thus, the Self is considered, in terms of the world of
conditioned-knowledge which we experience today, as
the Supreme Knower who knows everything, Omniscient
(Kavih), and without whom no knowledge is ever possible.
ANCIENT (Puranah) --- The Self is considered as the most
Ancient because the Eternal Truth is that which was
before all creation, which remains the same all through the
ages of existence, and which shall ever remain the same
even after the projections of plurality have ended. To
indicate that the One Self ever remains the same
everywhere, providing a substratum even for the concept
of time, It is indicated here as the Ancient.
THE OVER-RULER (Anushasitah) --- It is not in any way
indicated here that the Self is a Sultan, tyrannically ruling
over the world. Here the term 'Over-ruler' is only to
indicate that if the Principle of Awareness were not
presiding over the multiple faculties of perception, feeling,
and comprehension in us, our physical, mental and
intellectual experiences could not have been harmonised
into the meaningful existence of our life-time.

577

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Overlordship, mentioned here, only indicates that the
Knowing Principle of Consciousness is the very essence
but for which life --- defined as a continuous series of
experiences --- in any form is never possible. Without mud
the mud-pots cannot exist; in all pots the mud is the
OVER-RULER. Just as gold in all gold ornaments, the
ocean in all waves, sweetness in all candy, so too is the
Self in the Universe of names and forms. It is in this sense
that the term 'Overruler' is to be understood. To conceive
of God as a mighty policeman standing with two keys,
one made of gold to open the gates of heaven, and the
other of iron to open the doors of hell, is a barbarous
concept of Godhood that has nothing sacred in it to attract
the intellectually awakened generations!
MINUTER THAN AN ATOM (Anoraniyan) --- The
simplest and the smallest physically divisible particle of
any element which still maintains the specific properties
of that element is called its atom. Thus, it is indicated here
that the Self is the subtlest of the subtle. The subtler a
thing, the greater is its pervasiveness. Water is considered
subtler than a block of ice, and the steam ensuing when
water is boiled is considered subtler than the water itself.
In all these stages, pervasiveness is the measuring rod of
their comparative subtleties. In the Upanishadic lore, it is
usual to consider the Self as "the Subtlest of the Subtle"
which only indicates that "It pervades all, and nothing
pervades It."

578

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE NOURISHER OF ALL (Sarvasya Dhatarah) --- The
nourisher here means the support that sustains
everything. In a cinema theatre, the changeless whitescreen can be considered as the nourisher of the
entertainment, inasmuch as, without it the ever-changing
flow of pictures could not have given us the impression of
a continuous story. However glorious might be the
message that a master-painter has brought out with his
brush, it is the consistent strength of the canvas behind,
that nourishes and sustains the integrity and beauty of the
picture. Similarly, if the One Consciousness were not
constantly illumining the ever-changing flux of things and
happenings around and within us from birth to death,
through all conditions and states of our existence, the
homogeneous oneness of life would never have been ours
to react to and feel fulfilled with.
OF FORM INCONCEIVABLE (Achintya-roopah) --- If there
be a factor that is Omniscient, Ancient, Over-ruler,
Subtlest of the subtle, and Nourisher of all, and if we are
advised to meditate upon It, then it is possible that we
immediately get a false notion that the Self can be thought
of and comprehended, as any other finite object or idea,
by our limited faculties of the head or the heart. To
remove this wrong idea and to emphasize that the Infinite
cannot be comprehended by the finite instruments of
perception, feeling and understanding --- but can only be
apprehended when these equipments are transcended --the Lord is particularly anxious to tell His students that
the Self is of "THE FORM INCONCEIVABLE." Though it
579

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

is thus, in fact, inconceivable, yet, on transcending the
equipment of experiences, the individual, in a process of
Divine Awakening, can subjectively apprehend It to be his
own Essential Nature.
LUMINOUS LIKE THE SUN (Aditya-varnah) --- If the
implication of the above term (Achintya-roopah) be true, no
intelligent seeker can arrest his temptation to doubt as to
how the Self can ever be realised. As seekers, we live and
strive within the limitations of our own mind and
intellect. Every moment of our existence, we gather a
harvest of experiences only through the use of the
different equipments given to us. Living as we are, rooted
in our false identifications with these equipments in the
early days of our spiritual efforts, the seeker in us should
necessarily despair at the impossible conception and the
mad mission of "knowing the UN-KNOWABLE" --conceiving the IN-CONCEIVABLE --- understanding the
UN-UNDERSTANDABLE --- or experiencing the IN
EXPERIENCABLE!!!
The Self is defined as the UN-UNDERSTANDABLE, or
the IN-CONCEIVABLE, or IN-EXPERIENCABLE, etc.,
only to indicate that the instruments of cognition,
experience and apprehension are not available for
functioning in the Self. The dream-gun, with which the
dreamer had shot the enemies of his dream-world, cannot
be any longer handled by him, when once he has
awakened. Even the bloody hands of a dreamer, after a
dream-murder, become automatically clean, without
580

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

either soap or water, the moment he wakes up! As long as
man is identifying with his limiting adjuncts, he lives in
the external world of his self-projected delusory
multiplicity, wherein the Self is "IN-CONCEIVABLE, and
IN-EXPERIENCABLE." But the moment these adjuncts are
transcended through a process of steadfast contemplation
on the Self, he gets awakened to his own nature of Pure
Being.
Once having understood this much of the fundamental
concepts of Vedanta, it becomes easy to appreciate the
matchless beauty of the example of the Sun. In order to see
the Sun, no other light is necessary, as the Sun is the
"SOURCE" of all light, the one illuminator that illuminates
everything else. Just as, in the physical world, the Sun, in
its self-effulgence, is self-evident, so too, in the spiritual
realm, to know the Knowledge Absolute, no other
knowing-principle is needed. The dreamer can never
KNOW the waker, for, while knowing the waking-state
the dreamer himself ends to BECOME the waker; to
awaken oneself from the dream is to know the waker; to
KNOW the waker is to BECOME the waker. So too, on
ending the ego-centric existence, in the flash of the
spiritual awakening, the misguided, panting ego ends
itself in the re-discovery that it has been nothing but the
Self, at all times. This vast suggestion is cramped into a
mystic word-picture: "LUMINOUS LIKE THE SUN."
BEYOND ALL DARKNESS (Tamasah-Parastat) --- The
limited and the finite example of the Sun calls into the
581

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

heart of a student some dangerous misgivings. The Sun in
the heavens is, no doubt, resplendent, but only during the
day; and even during the day-time there are various
degrees of intensity of the sunlight experienced by the
living kingdom. If the Self is "LUMINOUS LIKE THE
SUN," then the industrious student may gather that the
Self also varies in Its intensity, and that there are periods
of time when It is not at all available! To remove these two
fallacious ideas --- that the Self is variable in nature and
sometimes totally absent, this qualifying term is used
here. The very limitation of the Sun, meaning the darkness
of the night, is negated when Krishna says that the Self is
"BEYOND THE DARKNESS" of ignorance, or Maya.
He who meditates upon the Self thus, as Omniscient,
Ancient, Overruler, Subtlest of the subtle, Nourisher of all,
of Inconceivable Form, Self-illuminating as the Sun, and
Beyond all traces of ignorance, is the one who "goes to
Him."
10. At the time of death, with an unshaken mind full of
devotion, by the power of 'YOGA' fixing the whole 'PRANA'
(breath) between the two eyebrows, he (the seeker) reaches the
Supreme Resplendent 'PURUSHA. '
Following the word-meaning only, this stanza has been
indeed, very often, sadly mis-understood and badly
interpreted.
582

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This section in the Geeta is describing single-pointed
meditation upon the Highest. Therefore the expression AT
THE TIME OF DEATH is to be understood as "AT THE
MOMENT OF THE DEATH OF THE EGO." When all
identifications
with
the
body-mind-intellect
are
consciously withdrawn through the process of meditation,
at the HALT-MOMENT of perfect inner silence and
tranquillity, "WITH THE MIND UNMOVING," the
meditator can follow the instructions contained in this
stanza.
The term "Bhakti" is not to be understood in its cheap
connotation, which it has come to gather in its direct
translation as 'devotion.' Self-less love, seeking a
fulfilment in itself, when directed towards the divine with
firm faith and an all-out belief, is called Bhakti. Love itself
means identifying with the object of love in such a way
that the joys and sorrows of the beloved become equally
poignant joys and sorrows of the lover. In short, the lovers
become one with their beloveds, both in their physical and
emotional lives. Therefore, Shankara describes Bhakti as
"the identification of the ego with its Real Nature."
In the context of the stanza here, the important suggestion
given to the meditator is that his meditation should be
accompanied by a readiness to identify himself intensely
with the Principle of Awareness, which has been
exhaustively indicated in the previous stanza. He must
come to live the Self, within himself, at that still moment
583

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of Inward Silence, which rings the death-knell of the
deluded-ego.
BY THE POWER OF YOGA (Yoga-balena) --- Here we are
not talking of some secret and mysterious strength --- the
Serpent Power --- which is the highly guarded secret of a
rare few, which should not be spilt to everyone even
among those who profess to be the devotees of the Lord.
The strength acquired by a meditator, when he meditates
upon the Supreme regularly for a long period of time, is
the strength --- the "POWER OF YOGA" --- that is
indicated here. This is nothing other than the inward
strength, the inward fire, that grows when the mind is
withdrawn from its endless agitations and the intellect is
peacefully rested in its contemplations upon the infinite
qualities of the Absolute.
The meditator, in a relatively short time, discovers in
himself a wealth of mental equipoise and an indescribable
efficiency, ready to bring his entire mental equipment into
the contemplation of the Self in him. When an individual
is thus engaged in meditation, all his pranas are
concentrated at the point of his meditation --- maybe
"between the eye-brows," as it represents the frontal-brain,
the seat of steady thought.
Prana is the term used in the Science of Vedanta to indicate
"all the different expressions of life's vitality, through the
various instruments and organs of the body." Life
expressing itself as the various functions in a living
584

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

physical body is called the Prana, which, according to its
varied manifestations is classified under five main
headings as: Prana: the faculty of sense perception; Apana:
the excretory system; Vyana: the digestive system; Samana:
the circulatory system; and Udana: the capacity in us to see
beyond our present world of knowledge into the field of
some greater concept and live it. All these different
activities are channels of dissipation through which the
vital attention in us is getting exhausted. When an
individual gets lost in the Silence within at the moment of
his merger with the Self, all these faculties are temporarily
arrested. For a seeker walking the Path of Meditation no
other violent physical practices at all are needed.
Such an individual --- in whom, during the deepest
moments of concentration, the mind becomes perfectly
silent and tranquil; in whom, through the strength of his
steadfast meditation, all manifestations of life's presence
through his physical body become controlled and arrested
and when he, in his enthusiasm, totally identifies with the
point of his contemplation, the Self --- "HE GOES TO
THAT SUPREME RESPLENDENT SELF (PURUSHA)."
AS AN INTRODUCTION TO THE MEDITATION UPON
OM, THE FOLLOWING IS GIVEN:
11. That which is declared Imperishable by the VEDA -knowers;
That into which, the self-controlled and desire-freed enter; That
585

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

desiring which BRAHMCHARYA is practised --- That Goal I
will declare to thee in brief.
This stanza, which is reminiscent of a famous Upanishadic
declaration, while glorifying the goal, is promising that
Krishna will, in the following verses, explain the Supreme
destination of Perfection and the means of achieving it.
Worship (Upasana) of the syllable OM is frequently
advised in almost all the Upanishads as a sure method of
making the final adjustments in the mind-intellectequipment of the meditator, so that complete success in
meditation may be assured to him. From the Pauranic era
onwards, meditation with faith and devotion, regularly,
upon any of the recognised incarnations, has also been
found to serve the same purpose with the same efficiency.
Here, very many necessary precautions and warnings are
given to the seeker, so that his spiritual pilgrimage may be
comparatively easy and pleasant. The obstacles about
which meditators generally complain arise from their own
lack of self-withdrawal from the finite matterenvelopments. It is necessary that, as a Science of Self
Perfection, Vedanta should not only give the techniques of
meditation, but also indicate for the seekers the possible
pit-falls on the path and equip them, sufficiently early,
with all instructions as to how they can get out, in case
they fall into any of these jamming ruts. This verse
indicates how one can be assured of an easy path while
moving ahead on the track of meditation --- carefully
586

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

avoiding all extrovert desires that cater to one's sensuous
appetites, and by practising severe and consistent selfcontrol.
In the opening of this chapter, (stanza-3) the Supreme was
defined as the Imperishable. Quoting Himself, Krishna
emphasises here that the very same Imperishable Truth
can be realised --- they come to "enter into the
Imperishable" --- when they, the men of self-control, who
are unagitated by desires, withdraw successfully from the
changeable and the perishable in themselves.
FREED FROM ATTACHMENT (Veeta-ragah) --- The entire
Geeta is a Song of renunciation; not a dull-witted and uncreative renunciation, but a healthy detachment through
right knowledge, which is the harbinger of all progress
and development everywhere. The renunciation of desires
is not a psychological suppression of the existing
appetites, but that which takes place as a result of a
natural blossoming of the intellect. The newly opened
buds, after a time, renounce their soft, beautiful skirts and
stand naked, expressing a renunciation of the gorgeous;
but in nature, this happens only when the flowers are
pollinated and the fruits are well in the making. The
shedding of the petals may be a sacrifice or renunciation
from the standpoint of a casual flower-gazer, but to the
farmer who knows, it is a sacrifice or renunciation of the
flowers in their newly gained maturity that has
automatically made the beautiful petals fall off.
587

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Similarly, in the Spiritual Science of India, no doubt, there
is an emphasis on the necessity of renunciation, but it is
not a sad and melancholy self-denial or self-punishment,
which some other religions do preach and practise. A
renunciation that has sprung up from the fertile lands of
efficient discrimination is that which is insisted upon by
the intellectual giants of the Upanishads. The term "ONE
FREED FROM ATTACHMENT" is therefore, to be
understood as one who has grown out of his passionate
attachments to the finite, that constitute the insignificant
parade of the world, in his more mature and steady
understanding of the nature and the goal of his life.
Also, it is true that the more the number of desires
entertained, the greater is the mental tossing, and the
consequent agitation. The greater the disturbance in the
mind, the lesser is the mental potentiality expressed. A
meditator's success depends upon his mental dynamism,
and the only wealth that can ease the rigours of the
journey is his own mental equipoise and inward peace.
Therefore, as a policy, it is advised that men of least desire
have the maximum chance for the greatest success in the
Path of Knowledge.
IN ORDER TO INDICATE WHAT THE EARLY STAGES
OF 'UPASANA' AND THEIR RESULTS ARE, THE
FOLLOWING IS ADDED:

588

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

12. Having closed all the gates, having confined the mind in the
heart, having fixed the life-breath in the "head, " engaged in the
practice of concentration,
13. Uttering the one-syllabled 'OM' --- the (symbol of)
BRAHMAN --- and remembering Me, he who departs, leaving
the body, attains the Supreme Goal.
The practice of concentration can most effectively be
undertaken and efficiently continued only when three
necessary conditions are fulfilled by the meditator. These
are narrated here in the verses in the sequence they have
to be practised.
CONTROLLING ALL THE SENSES --- Each sense-organ
is an aperture in the physical body. The porous skin, the
ear, the nose, the eyes, and the taste-buds are the five main
gates through which the external stimuli reach the mental
zone to agitate it. To shut these five doors through
discrimination and detachment is the first process, before
the meditator can ever hope to enter the field of
meditation. These are the five inlets through which not
only the external world storms in and agitates the mind,
but our mind also runs out to wander among its sensuous
ditches. When once these tunnels-of-disturbance are
blockaded, the new flow of disturbances is shut out.
CONFINING THE MIND IN THE HEART --- Even
though the mind is not now directly open for any
onslaught by fresh contingents of sense stimuli, it is
589

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

capable of getting disturbed due to the previous
impressions that it might have gathered in its past
experiences in the finite world of change and pleasure.
Therefore the mind, the instrument of emotion and
feeling, it is advised, is to be confined in the 'heart.'
The term 'heart'in Vedanta is not the pumping-organ that
maintains the circulatory system in a physical structure. In
the field of literature and philosophy, heart is a conceptual
centre in the mind from where all positive and noble
thoughts of love and tenderness, kindness and charity,
devotion and surrender, constantly spring up. When once
the gross stimuli are held back from entering the mind,
the seeker is advised not to choke his faculty of emotion
and feeling but to DIVINISE IT. Let the mind function
only in the dignity and status of the heart. It has already
been discussed how positive thinking brings into the mind
the least amount of disturbance. Negative thoughts are
those that bring into the mind stormy conditions of
agitation and restlessness.
WITHDRAWING ALL THE PRANAS, "THE VITAL
MANIFESTATIONS
OF
LIFE
THROUGH
THE
DIFFERENT EQUIPMENTS," INTO THE INTELLECT
means the total withdrawal of the intellect from all its
identifications with the lower, gained by dissociating
ourselves from all our perceptions, etc. This is
accomplished through a process of totally engaging the
mind-intellect in the contemplation of the Self. When the
meditator's mind, drawn away from the sense590

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

disturbances, is purified in the realm of the diviner
thoughts, and when such a mind is perfectly controlled
and held steady by an intellect gushing out towards the
contemplation of the Self, as explained earlier, (Ibid.-9, 10)
the existing mental condition is said to be "occupied in the
practice of concentration" (Yoga-dharanam).
Every meditator who can make an attempt at forgetting
his immediate sensual surroundings, and, surcharged
with joy and contentment, can bring his mind under the
total control of his discriminative intellect, can mentally
chant OM with ease and enthusiasm, and observe the
rising OM-waves in this otherwise silenced mind... is the
student fit for the worship of OM. The following line in its
amplitude of significance clearly brings out the same
view-point.
HE WHO DEPARTS, LEAVING THE BODY --- While
chanting and contemplating upon the significance of OM,
the seeker becomes so detached from all his delusory
identifications with the false matter-envelopments that the
ego is sublimated; this is the true death "LEAVING THE
BODY." In his single-pointed, all-out, self-forgetting
contemplation upon the significance of OM --- as the
Substratum on which is played the drama of life and
death, projected by the mischievous mind --- the seeker, in
Krishna's own words, "ATTAINS THE SUPREME GOAL."

591

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IS SELF RE-DISCOVERY SO DIFFICULT EQUALLY FOR
ALL PEOPLE WHO ARE WALKING THE PATH OF
MEDITATION?
14. I am easily attainable by that ever-steadfast YOGI who
constantly remembers Me daily, not thinking of anything else,
O Partha.
To the one who is ever-steadfast in the Life Divine and
"REMEMBERS ME," THE SELF, ALWAYS AND DAILY,
with a mind unshattered, to him the Self is easily
attainable. The statements in the previous stanzas are all
again summarised here in a more emphatic and direct
language.
PRAYER IS NO INSECTICIDE TO BE SPRAYED NOW
AND THEN; NOR SHOULD THE DIVINE ALTAR BE
CONSIDERED AS A BATH-ROOM, WHERE ONE
ENTERS DIRTY AND WALKS OUT CLEAN! Here
Krishna is very careful to insist, with all the strength and
emphasis that He can command, that the Divine
Consciousness must be maintained by the seeker
constantly and continuously "ALL THROUGH THE DAY,
DAILY."
To such an individual, "I AM EASILY ATTAINABLE, O
ARJUNA." This positive assertion has a very important
significance inasmuch as it indicates that the negation of
592

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

these conditions will not be conducive even to hope for
success in meditation.
WHY SHOULD ONE STRUGGLE SO HARD TO
REALISE THE SELF? LISTEN:
15. Having attained Me, these MAHATMAS (great souls) do
not again take birth, which is the house of pain and is noneternal, they having reached the Highest Perfection ,
MOKSHA.
Estimating the benefit enjoyed by a Man-of-Perfection,
through the realisation of the Self, it is said that "HAVING
ATTAINED ME, THE HIGH-SOULED ONES ARE NO
MORE SUBJECT TO RE-BIRTH." To the philosophically
thoughtful, rebirth is the starting point of all pains and
imperfections. Krishna also says in the verse that rebirth
is a "HOUSE OF PAIN AND IS EPHEMERAL."
In the history of thought in the Upanishads, it is quite
interesting to note how the goal of life, which was
considered in the beginning as "the state of deathlessness"
(Amritattwa), came to the reckoned, later on, as the "the
absence of rebirth" (Na-punar-janma). In the beginning, the
anxiety of the seeker was to end the unavoidable and the
most horrid of all experiences called 'death.' As
knowledge increased through the right evaluation of the
happenings in life, it soon became clear to the subjective
593

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

research-scholars, the Rishis, that death had really no sting
at all for those who had understood that it is nothing but
one of the different experiences in life. Death can in no
way clip off the continuity of existence. Those relentless
thinkers had, in the logic of their thoughts, come to the
conclusion that birth was the beginning of all pains, and
therefore, the goal of life, if at all it was possible to
achieve, should be "THE STATE OF NO MORE
REBIRTH."
The dream of rebirth and its destinies belongs to the
delusory ego, which is nothing but the Unborn Self
identifying with its delusory matter-envelopments.
Electricity conditioned by the bulb is the light; when the
bulb gets broken, the light which is an effect merges with
its cause, the current, one-without-a-second, everywhere
the same, illumining all the bulbs in the world. Similarly,
the Self conditioned by a given mind and intellect is the
ego (Jeeva), which suffers the rebirth, the agonies of
imperfections, the disease, the decay and the death. The
ego comes to rediscover that it is nothing other than the
Self, once the mind-intellect equipment has been stilled.
He who thus experiences the Self as his own Real Nature
realises that he has never any relationship at all with the
equipments of feeling and understanding. Just as an
awakened man has no more relationship with his own
dream-wife and children, the ego ends its march through
the thorny path of pain and finitude, when it awakens to
the spiritual cognition of the Self. Such great souls will no
594

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

more have any need to manifest in the plane of plurality
to be presented with the repeated lashes of sorrow and
misery.
He who has, through the process of "CONSTANT
CONTEMPLATION OF THE SELF" (VIII-14) during his
lifetime, learnt to control all the senses, to regulate the
mind and the heart, to control and to arrest all pranas in
the intellect --- he directly comes to identify himself with
the Infinite and the Eternal, and shall no more come back
into a limited embodiment to continue his futile search for
infinite satisfaction among the finite world-of-objects.
BUT ARE THERE ANY WHO COME BACK NOT
REACHING THE HIGHEST? LISTEN:
16. Worlds upto the "world-of -BRAHMAJI" are subject to
rebirth, O Arjuna; but he who reaches Me, O Kaunteya, has no
birth.
It is a characteristic technique, often employed by the
Teacher in the Geeta, to bring home his ideas, by
expressing them, for purposes of emphasis, against the
background of their opposites. Thus, we find here in the
verse two contradictory factors put in opposition to each
other so that, each, as a contrast to the other, may shine
out the best in the mental horizon of the students. "UP TO
THE REALM OF BRAHMAJI ALL ARE SUBJECT TO
REBIRTH." This idea is contrasted with the result of
595

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

realising directly and totally the Self, the Eternal: "BUT,
AFTER ATTAINING ME THERE IS NO REBIRTH."
The theory of gradual liberation (Krama Mukti), accepted
in Vedanta, says that ritualism (Karma), accompanied by
meditation (Upasana), takes the ego to the realm-of-theCreator (Brahma-loka) where, at the end of the Kalpa (the
cycle of creation and dissolution), it merges with the
Supreme. Even in Brahma-loka it is necessary that the ego
must, through self-effort, live strictly all the spiritual
directions of the Creator, and through constant
contemplation upon the Self (Atma-Vichara) come to
deserve the total liberation, by ending all its connections
with "ignorance." Those who have not reached the realmof-the-Creator, may not come to enjoy the Suprememerger. They will, at the end of the Kalpa, have to come
back and take their manifestation in embodiments,
ordered by their remaining vasanas. This principle is kept
in mind when Krishna says that rebirth is for everyone,
even to those who have attained any high plane up to
Brahma-loka; having once reached Brahma-loka, there is no
return, but from there the meditator rises to merge in the
Self.
But to those who have awakened to the rediscovery of
their essential, Eternal Nature and realised themselves to
be the One, All-pervading Self --- "AFTER ATTAINING
ME" --- to them, thereafter, there is no return to the plane
of limited-existence. To the waker there is no re-admission
into the realm where he was when he was dreaming; to
596

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

awake is to miss for ever the joys and sorrows of that
dream which he had dreamt. After attaining the wakerhood (Me) there is no return (rebirth) into the dreamland
(Samsara).
17. Those people who know (the length of) the day- ofBRAHMA which ends in a thousand YUGAS (aeons) , and the
night which (also) ends in a thousand YUGAS (aeons) , they
know day-and-night.
Einstein's 'Theory of Relativity' has pricked the bubble
and it has been accepted even in the West that the
concepts of time and space depend upon individual
factors governing their measurements. Time hangs
heavily and moves at a snail's pace when one is in
agitation, as when one is anxiously waiting for something;
while, to the same individual, time flies when he is quite
at ease with himself, under circumstances happy,
pleasant, and entertaining. One playing cards knows not
when the night was spent and he is surprised when he
notices the early dawn peeping through the windows. The
same person will complain that each moment has
lengthened itself to become hours, when he is at some
unpleasant work, or is suffering some pain. He who is
enjoying the homogeneous experience of sleep, has no
concept of time at all while he is sleeping.
From the above, it has been logically concluded in the
philosophy of the Hindus, that time is truly the measure
597

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of the interval between two different experiences. The
greater the number of experiences that flood the mind to
agitate it, the slower will the time move; while the longer
the same experience continues, the faster moves the time.
In a single given experience there is no perception of time
just as there is no concept of distance when there is only
one point; distances can be measured only between two or
more points. Basing their calculations upon this theory,
the Pauranic-poets rightly conceived that their gods had a
larger dial for their divine clocks! In the Upanishads also,
we find a scale of relative intensity of Bliss-experience,
from a mortal, healthy, young man, living in conducive
environments, upto the very Creator Himself. This
ascending scale of joy, experienced in different realms of
Consciousness, is showing the relative mental equipoise
and tranquillity at those different levels of existence.
It is said here that a thousand "cycles" constitute the daytime of the Creator; and an equally long thousand "cycles"
constitute the night-time of the Creator. This declaration
of those, "WHO KNOW THE TRUE MEASURE OF THE
DAY AND THE NIGHT," calculated in terms of "cycles"
has been translated in terms of our 365-day years. Each
"cycle" consists of aeons (Yugas). Four aeons (Yugas)
together constitute one "cycle," and a thousand "cycles"
are conceived of as constituting the daytime of the
Creator!
As the individual units, so is the sum total of the
assembly. The individual mind projects, creates and
598

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sustains what its fancies dictate, and without any regret
scraps the whole lot, only to create afresh. This constant
function does take place in each individual only during
the day time, as representing the waking state. In the same
fashion the Total Mind --- the Cosmic Creator --- also is
conceived as creating the gross world of dense objects and
intelligent beings only during His waking hours.
18. From the unmanifested all the manifested proceed at the
coming of the "day" ; at the coming of "night" they dissolve
verily in that alone which is called the unmanifest.
19. This same multiple of beings are being born again and again,
and are dissolved (into the unmanifest) ; helplessly, O Partha, at
the coming of "night, " and they come forth again at the coming
of "day. "
In these two stanzas an explanation is given on how the
Creator employs Himself, during his day, which is a
thousand aeons long, and during his night, which also is
an equally long interval. It is also added here, that the
Creator creates during the day, and the entire created
world, at the approach of His night, merges into 'the
unmanifest' (Avyakta).
In the worldly sense of the term, 'creation'is generally
understood as the production of something new.
Philosophically viewed, 'creation'has a subtler significance
and a more intimate meaning. A pot-maker can 'create'
599

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

pots out of mud, but he cannot 'create' Laddus (a popular
Indian sweetmeat) out of the same mud! The act of
'creation'is only the production of a name and form, with
some specific qualities, out of a raw-material in which the
same name, form, and qualities are already existing in an
unmanifest condition. The 'POT-NESS' was in the mud,
while the 'Laddu-ness' is not therein, and therefore, a pot
can be 'created' from a given sample of mud, not so even a
tiny bit of Laddu. Hence, it is concluded by the thinkers of
Vedanta that "CREATION IS BUT A CRYSTALLISATION
OF THE UNMANIFEST DORMANT NAMES, FORMS,
AND QUALITIES, INTO THEIR MANIFEST FORMS OF
EXISTENCE."
Anyone, living as he does on any given day, is but the
product of the numerous yesterdays that he has lived in
his intellectual thoughts, his emotional feelings and his
physical actions. The actions of the past, supported by the
thoughts entertained and the valuations accepted by him,
leave a distinct flavour upon his mind and intellect, and
the future thoughts and their flow are controlled and
directed by the previously made thought-channels.
Just as there is consistency of species in procreation, so
also, there is a consistency noticeable in the multiplication
of thoughts. Just as frogs breed frogs, and men breed men,
or mango seeds germinate and grow to put forth
mangoes, so too, good thoughts creating good thoughtcurrents can multiply only into a flood of good thoughts.
These thought-impressions in the mind (vasanas), that lie
600

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

unmanifest to our sense-organs and often to our own
mental and intellectual perceptions, become manifested as
gross actions, thoughts and words, making our path of life
either smooth or rough, according to the texture and
quality of the thoughts manifested.
Suppose a doctor, an advocate, a devotee and dacoit are
all sleeping in a rest-house. While sleeping, all of them
look the same --- masses of flesh and bones, warm and
breathing. The advocate is in no way different from the
dacoit, nor is the doctor different from the devotee. The
specific qualities in each bosom, at this moment, though
totally absent from observation are not non-existent but
they remain in a condition of dormancy.
These
unmanifested
temperaments,
capacities,
inclinations and tendencies come to project forth and
manifest when they wake up, and once they leave the resthouse, each will be pursuing his own particular thoughttendencies. In the rest-house, the doctor, the advocate, the
devotee and the dacoit, were all in their "unmanifest-state"
(Pralaya) while they were asleep; but at dawn, when they
wake up, these four different specimens are projected
forth into manifestation. This, in the language of religion
and philosophy, is called "creation."
With this correct understanding of the process of
"creation," it would be certainly easy for us to understand
the cosmic processes of "creation and dissolution." The
Creator, or the Total-mind, during His waking hours of
601

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

thousand aeons, projects out the already existing vasanas,
and "AT THE APPROACH OF NIGHT, THEY MERGE
VERILY INTO THAT ALONE, WHICH IS CALLED THE
'UNMANIFEST'."
It is insisted here by Lord Krishna, that "THE VERY SAME
MULTITUDE OF BEINGS ARE BORN AGAIN AND
AGAIN, AND MERGE IN SPITE OF THEMSELVES."
Subjectively, this declaration provides us with a clearer
understanding of how man becomes enslaved by his own
thoughts and emotions. It is never possible that an animalman, pursuing consistently the life of sensuality,
perpetrating unkind cruelties in order to satisfy his
passions can wake up overnight, to be a gracious man of
all perfections --- however great his teacher, however
divine the occasion, and whatever the sanctity of the place
or the time may be.
No teacher can, or shall ever, teach his disciple and
thereby transform him, instantaneously, into a divine
person, unless, of course, the student has the divine
tendencies lying dormant and ready for manifestation in
him! The moment anybody argues that, as a rare instance,
one great soul had been so transformed in the past, by one
unique teacher, then there must have been some equally
unique instance of some magician producing a Laddu out
of mud! In the latter case, we know that it was only magic
and that the Laddu was NOT produced from the mud.
Similarly, intelligent people, with some understanding of
the Science of Life, and with at least a little share of respect
602

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

for and devotion to the Prophet of the Geeta, will hoot
down such a fantastic story. Such a story can be accepted
only in a mood of poetic exaggeration indulged in by the
disciples, in praise of their teacher.
THE VERY SAME MULTITUDE OF BEINGS, meaning the
very same bundles of thought-impressions --- an
individual being nothing other than the thoughts that he
entertains --- arrive at different fields of activity and states
of Consciousness in order to exhaust themselves. "IN
SPITE OF THEMSELVES" (Avassah), is a powerful
expression indicating the incapacity of an individual to
disinherit himself from his past. The past always faithfully
follows us like our shadow --- darkening our path when
we turn our back to the Light of Knowledge, and
accompanying us submissively at our heels like a
guardian angel when we turn towards the effulgent Self
and wend our way towards It.
On leaving a physical embodiment, a particular mindintellect-equipment continues its existence in just the same
way as an actor who drops down the apparel of the king
at the close of the play and continues to exist in his
individual capacity as the father of his children, the
husband of his wife, etc. The taking up of a physical
structure and singing the song of one's mental vasanas, in
the form of actions, is called 'creation,' and when that
physical structure is given up, the thoughts and ideas,
having no equipment to express themselves, become the
unmanifest. A violinist playing on his violin makes the
603

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

music in him manifest; and, when the violin is kept away
in its box, the music in the individual becomes
unmanifest.
This 'realm of the unmanifest' in each bosom undergoes
constant change, whenever it comes in contact with the
world of manifestation and reacts to it. We already know
that change cannot take place unless it is upon a
changeless substratum.
UPON WHAT PERMANENT PLATFORM DOES THE
UNMANIFEST COME TO PLAY ITS DRAMA OF LIFE?
20. But verily there exists, higher than that unmanifest
(AVYAKTA) , another Unmanifested, which is Eternal, which
is not destroyed when all beings are destroyed.
The same black-board is approached by different teachers
to explain different subjects, during a single day in a class
room. The mathematics teacher's geometrical figures and
calculations are wiped clean by the geography teacher to
design his maps of the world and to trace the path of
rivers, the location of lakes and the position of mountains.
When the chemistry teacher arrives, he erases the entire
world of mountains, rivers and oceans represented on the
black-board, and he, in his turn, writes on it the laws of
chemical reactions among the various elements and their
compounds. The history teacher makes the black-board
clean again, to scribble on it the ancestral trees of
604

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dynasties destroyed and families forgotten. Each teacher
comes and writes on the black-board different words and
symbols which represent the design of knowledge that he
has in his bosom. But all designs were chalked out and
executed upon the same black-board, which illumined the
mathematical calculations, the geographical data, the
chemical formulae, and the historical facts, in turn.
Similarly, the changing world of the unmanifest must
have one Changeless Substratum, "THAT WHICH IS NOT
DESTROYED BY THE DESTRUCTION OF ALL BEINGS
(bhutas)." When, in the evening, the students and teachers
have all left the class room, the black-board still remains.
The principle of Pure Consciousness, Itself Unmanifest --inasmuch as It is not perceivable by the sense organs or
comprehensible by the mind and intellect --- is indicated
here as the changeless substratum of all, when the Lord
declares, "BEYOND THIS UNMANIFEST, THERE IS THE
OTHER ETERNAL EXISTENCE, THE UNMANIFESTED."
The unmanifest (vasanas) are the seeds of the manifest and
they constitute, what Vedanta indicates by its very familiar
term, "Ignorance" (Avidya). "Ignorance" can be only of an
existent something; I cannot be ignorant of my tail, since I
do not have a tail. This proves the existence of some
Positive Factor called the Truth, the Self --- the blackboard upon which all other conditional knowledges are
scribbled --- serving as the Permanent and Changeless
Substratum. "The ignorance of the Real Nature of this
Eternal Factor," is called Avidya, which, in its turn projects
605

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the manifested ever-changing world of names and forms.
The Ultimate Reality, the Self, is being indicated here as
something that lies beyond the hazy frontiers of the
delusory experiences of creation, dissolution, and recreation, over and over again.
IS THIS UNMANIFEST THEN THE SUPREME? OR, IS
THERE YET ANOTHER FACTOR WHICH ALONE IS FIT
TO BE THE GOAL OF LIFE?
21. That which is called the Unmanifest and the Imperishable,
that, they say is the Highest Goal (path) . They who reach It
never again return. That is My highest abode (state) .
What has been indicated in the previous stanza as "THE
OTHER UNMANIFEST --- WHICH IS THE ETERNAL
EXISTENCE --- WHICH KNOWS NO DESTRUCTION," is
explained here as the Imperishable mentioned earlier in
this chapter. The Imperishable was defined as the
Brahman, the substratum for the entire universe, and we
were
also advised that we must meditate upon OM as the
symbol of this Imperishable. The Self which is of the
nature of Pure Awareness is that which lends existence
and dynamism to the unmanifested vasanas, and makes
them capable of projecting out to form the manifested
world of activities and behaviours. This Eternal
606

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Unmanifested Factor, the Imperishable Self, is the highest
goal for man to achieve.
In all other states of existence, there is again and again the
experience of return. Just as sleep is not the end of life, but
only a refreshing pause between two spans of activity, so
too death is not an end, but often, only a restful pause in
the unmanifested condition, that comes between two
successive
manifested
existences
in
different
embodiments. It was already indicated that even from
higher levels of Consciousness, the ego-centres will have
to return to exhaust their unmanifested cravings, the
vasanas. Birth, we have already been told, is "A HOUSE
OF PAIN AND FINITUDE," and therefore, complete
satisfaction can be reached only when there is no rebirth -- no return.
Often, educated students of the present generation ask:
"Why, after realising the Self, should there be no-return?"
The question, though natural, cannot stand even a
moment's scrutiny. Generally, cause-hunting is for things
that happen and not for things that do not happen!
Nobody anxiously enquires why I am not in a hospital but
an intelligent enquirer has every right to enquire why I
have gone to the hospital. We may enquire why the
Infinite has become the finite; but the question does not
arise at all why the Infinite should not fall again into the
finite. This question is as absurd as my enquiring as to
why you are not yet in jail. For not going to jail, no causehunting is necessary. And if you have actually gone to jail,
607

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

there is certainly a justification to ask and enquire what is
the exact crime for which you have been sent to jail.
We can never explain to a little girl and make that child
understand what are the physical and emotional thrills of
married life; in her childhood she has not the vehicle for
comprehending the biological thrills of sex-life. But, as the
same girl grows in her maturity, she develops in herself
the biological antennae to feel and mentally comprehend
the very same thrills which were to her but empty
suggestions in early childhood --- when all she wanted
was that her mother should marry her! In the same
fashion, a seeker who lies burrowed in the dung-heap of
his mind and intellect, cannot, in its filthy atmosphere,
know the vast embrace of the horizon and the glorious
fragrance of the fresh breeze. As he detaches himself from
his false identifications, through the process of meditation
advised, (VIII-12, 13 and 14) he, as it were, hatches out of
his limiting adjuncts, and enters the vaster fields of subtler
experiences. On waking up alone can one realise the
falsehood of one's dreams; the dreamer can never, so long
as he dreams, realise the delusion from which he is
suffering. Having awakened from a dream, the waker
cannot be persecuted by his dream sorrows and his
dream-happenings.
The Self, or Pure Consciousness, is poetically described
here by Vyasa as the dwelling place of Krishna, "THAT IS
MY HIGHEST DWELLING-PLACE." In the Geeta, the
Singer of the Song Divine, is THE Self, and as such the
608

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Highest Goal is to reach the State of Pure Consciousness,
the Imperishable, which is available for the experiencer of
the Self. This was described at length while the teacher
was indicating the nature of Knowledge gained by one
who attains the State of the Divine Purusha.
THE DIRECT PATH BY WHICH THIS CONSUMMATE
GOAL CAN BE REACHED IS EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
22. That Highest 'PURUSHA' , O Partha, is attainable by
unswerving devotion to Him alone, within whom all beings
dwell, by whom all this is pervaded.
Here Krishna, the Prophet of the Hindus, vividly chalks
out the technique and the path by which "WHAT HAS
BEEN
CALLED
THE
UNMANIFEST,
THE
IMPERISHABLE --- THAT SUPREME PURUSHA IS
ATTAINABLE." Single-pointed devotion is the way and
the means. Devotion --- total selfless identification --- with
the Supreme Purusha can be achieved only when the
devotee has learnt to dissociate himself from all his
preoccupations with his world of body, mind, and
intellect. This detachment from the false is gained in a
growing attachment with the Real, the Permanent. An act
of inspired seeking, of identifying oneself totally with the
experience of 'SELF I AM' is the "WHOLE-SOULED
DEVOTION TO HIM ALONE,' that is mentioned in this
verse.
609

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Self, thus identified by the seeker in his meditation as
himself, should not be conceived of as merely the Divine
Spark that presides over his own individual matterenvelopments. Though the seeking is subjective, in
identifying with the Self, in the final experience, It is to be
realised as the very Substratum of the entire universe.
Implying this oneness of the Self with the Truth behind
the entire world of phenomena, Bhagawan says, as an
indication of the nature of the Purusha, "IN WHOM ALL
BEINGS ABIDE AND BY WHOM ALL THIS IS
PERVADED."
All mud-pots exist in the mud, and the mud pervades all
mud-pots irrespective of their shape, size, or colour.
Whether it be a breaker, or a wave, or a wavelet, all are
nothing but the ocean, and the ocean pervades all of them.
Within and without, the substance of all pots is the
substance with which they are made; the Essential Nature
of all the waves, big, small, or tiny is nothing other than
the ocean from which they are born.
Pure awareness is the Eternal Truth in which the
unmanifest comes to be projected forth as the manifest.
But for the cotton, the weaver's unmanifested conception
of beauty and proportion cannot be projected and spread
out through his creative art of weaving a design on the
cloth he is making. At all points in that design of cloth, the
one factor without which the design cannot stand is the
substance of the threads in the cloth --- the cotton.
610

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Pure Awareness, poured into the moulds of vasanas, when
frozen with "ignorance," becomes the multiple world of
names and forms --- recognised, craved for, and fought
over to acquire and to possess --- everywhere by everyone.
Therefore, one who has identified oneself with the Self, in
that vivid experience, comes to understand the very
Essence out of which the confusing multiplicity has risen
up into manifestation, to confound the stupid ego and to
torment it with the delusory dream of its samsara!
After enumerating the two distinct ways of procedure to
go back from the manifest to the unmanifest, in the
following, Krishna devotes an entire section to explain the
different routes taken by seekers to reach the two different
destinations. Some reach a destination from where there is
a return and others attain a level of experience from which
there is no return.
WHAT ARE THE TWO PATHS?
23. Now at what time (path) departing, YOGINS go, never to
return, as also to return, that time (path) , I will tell you, O
Chief of Bharatas.
The Lord has already explained that there are two goals in
life which men seek: the extrovert life of satisfying the ego
and gaining its flickering joys among the sense-objects --each experience of which soon sours itself to become
sorrow; and the Divine Mission of seeking the
611

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Imperishable by ending the ego in a re-discovery of its
own real Nature as nothing other than the Eternal
Consciousness, the Changeless Substratum of the whole
universe.
These two goals, it has been indicated, differ from each
other inasmuch as the former ensures a return again to a
finite embodiment, to live the consequent ego-centric life
of limitations, and the latter promises a goal, having
reached which, there is no return. The Realised One comes
to experience and enjoy the Infinite Beatitude of the Bliss
Absolute as his own Real Self.
If thus, there are two goals to be gained, there must
necessarily be two different paths guiding the two types
of seekers to their respective destinations. In the stanza
under review, the Lord promises that he will explain to
"the Chief of the Bharata family," both the "Path of return"
and the "Path of no-return."
There is a pun on the word 'Kale' used here; it shows both
the TIME of departure and the PATH pursued by the
different types of seekers at the end of their present
manifestations.
THE PATH PURSUED BY THOSE WHO HAVE NO
RETURN IS AS FOLLOWS:

612

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

24. Fire, light, day-time, the bright fortnight, the six months of
the northern solstice; following this path, men who know
BRAHMAN go to BRAHMAN.
Here, in the stanza, the path of "gradual liberation"
(Krama-mukti) is explained. According to the Upanishadic
tradition, "he who lived a life of rituals (Karmas) and
worship (Upasana), to enjoy the result so accrued, will
walk the 'Path-of-the-gods' (Devayana) and entering
through the Sun, will go beyond it to Brahma-loka." There
he enjoys the super-sensuous Bliss till the end of the
"cycle," when, along with the Creator, he gets total
liberation. This 'Path-of-the-gods,' is indicated here by the
terms borrowed from the Upanishads which have a wealth
of suggestiveness to all students of the Rishi-declarations.
FIRE, FLAME, DAY-TIME, THE BRIGHT FORTNIGHT,
THE SIX MONTHS OF THE NORTHERN SOLSTICE OF
THE SUN --- These indicate the "Path-of-the-gods"
presided over by the Sun. In the Prashnopanishad this has
been vividly brought out when the Upanishad supplies the
students with a theory of the creation of multiplicity from
the one Great Truth. It is explained that Prajapati, the
Creator, Himself became the Sun and the Moon, and these
two phenomenal objects are mentioned as representing
energy and matter respectively.
Identifying with the Dynamic Centre in himself, a seeker
tries to live the life. Such an Upasaka of Truth, at the time
613

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of his departure from his present manifestation in the
world, comes to think of the object of contemplation of his
whole life-time, and naturally, he goes to the world of his
thoughts --- "as you think so you become." By entertaining
evolutionary thoughts in one's mind all through one's life,
one must, after leaving the present embodiment, walk the
ascending path of evolution, the 'Path-of-the-gods,'
indicated here as "THE PATH OF LIGHT AND FIRE, OF
DAY TIME, OF THE BRIGHT FORTNIGHT, OF THE
NORTHERN SOLSTICE OF THE SUN." Thus, in the
mystic language of the Upanishads, the path pursued by
those who are great devotees of Brahman, the Eternal, is
described as stretching towards the North. These
implications are all epitomised and the Upanishadic Rishis
often use the term "Northern Route" to indicate "the Path
of the Gradual Liberation."
AS CONTRASTED WITH THIS PATH OF NO-RETURN
THERE IS THE PATH OF SURE-RETURN WHICH IS
EXPLAINED IN THE FOLLOWING:
25. Smoke, night-time, the dark fortnight, also six months of the
southern solstice, attaining by these to the Moon, the lunar
light, the 'YOGI' returns.
"The Path of Return" is called the "Path of the Ancestor"
(Pitryana), and is considered as presided over by the
Moon, which represents the world-of-matter. Those who
leave the world after spending their lifetime in doing good
614

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and performing rituals (karmas), unaccompanied by any
worship (upasana), are those who go to the World-ofAncestors (Pitrus), otherwise popularly known as Heaven.
These denizens of Heaven, on having exhausted their
merits, gained by them through their divine actions, will
have to return into deserved embodiments, ordered by
their individual vasana-balance that is ardently pressing
for expression and fulfilment.
SMOKE, NIGHT-TIME, THE DARK FORTNIGHT, THE
SIX MONTHS OF THE SOUTHERN SOLSTICE --- These
indications chalk out "the Path through the Moon"
(Pitriyaana) to the world of the ancestors. The moon, as we
said, represents the world-of-matter and is the presiding
deity of the sense enjoyments. Such people do return after
having attained through the grace of the Moon the
Heavenly enjoyments for a period.
In short, these two stanzas indicate that, in his life-time, a
seeker struggling to raise himself above the various
matter-envelopments and his identifications with them,
reaches the higher spiritual realms from where, in the
stream of his spiritual progress, he reaches the Ultimate.
But in case he be a courter of pleasures, ever singing at the
temple of sensuality, then he falls on the path of realising
those developed instincts, and comes back again into the
field of action here --- wherein he can again make or
unmake himself.
IN CONCLUSION KRISHNA ADDS:
615

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

26. The Path of Light and the Path of Darkness available for the
world are verily thought to be both eternal; by the one, the "Path
of Light, " a man goes to return not; by the other, the "Path of
Darkness, " he returns again.
The two paths so vividly described above, are renamed
here as the 'Path-of-Light' and the 'Path-of-Darkness,'
according to the goal to which each "path" leads the
pilgrims. One takes the travellers to the brilliant heights of
evolutionary success; the other into the dark abyss of
devolutionary sorrow. These two "paths" described here,
in their general implications, can be considered as
showing the 'Path-of-Moksha' and the 'Path-of-Samsara.'
The ways of life in any given generation always fall under
two categories --- the secular and the sacred. The former,
the secular, is pursued by those who feel that food,
clothing and shelter are the absolutes and the fulfilment of
life lies in the satisfaction of the largest number of physical
and emotional sense-ticklers, and whose intellects are cold
and satisfied, feeling no urge to seek anything nobler and
diviner. The latter, the sacred, however, is pursued by
those who can feel no encouragement in their bosom,
when the sense-objects giggle and dance in front of their
sense-organs, and whose intellects are ever on fire with a
great seeking of something beyond, something deeper
than the mere surface existence in life.

616

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

These two 'paths' --- which mean not only the two
impulses of the sacred and the secular, but also all those
who follow these two paths --- the seekers of materialism
and the seekers of spirituality --- "ARE TO BE
CONSIDERED AS TRULY ETERNAL." In the largest
sense of the term, these two impulses together constitute
the entire Samsara, and since the world of finitude and
change is eternal, these two contrary impulses are also
eternal. But it is the Vedantic theory, approved and upheld
by the lived experiences of the Seers and Sages, that
Samsara for the individual can be ended.
Subjectively considered, this stanza may perhaps have a
secret suggestion to make to true Yogis --- meaning, the
sincere meditators. Even in an elderly Sadhaka, who has
been on the 'path' for years, the existing vasanas in him
may now and then come up to insist upon his
extroversion. At such moments of inner revolt in us, we,
as seekers and meditators, need not at all get
flabbergasted because, as the Lord explains, the
aspirations for the higher-life and the temptations for the
lower-existence are the two opposing forces that are
eternally at tug-of-war with each other.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE GAIN IN KNOWING THESE
TWO PATHS, AND THEIR ETERNAL NATURE?
27. Knowing these paths, O Partha, no YOGIN is deluded;
therefore, at all times be steadfast in YOGA , O Arjuna.
617

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

After knowing that the "Path of Light" and the "Path of
Darkness" are the two opposing forces that function in our
mental life eternally, a true seeker will not fall into any
sense of despair, when he watches a revolt rising in his
bosom. "NO 'YOGI' IS DELUDED, KNOWING THESE
PATHS."
The entire line of argument pursued by Krishna, is to
reveal slowly and steadily the "Path of Return" and the
"Path of No-Return" and now, in this, the penultimate
stanza of this chapter, the Lord summarises the thesis and
purpose, and says, "THEREFORE, ARJUNA, YOU BE A
'YOGI' AT ALL TIMES." Here, he who has withdrawn
himself from his false identifications and has come to fix
his single-pointed mind in the contemplation of the Self, is
a Yogi.
In short, the entire chapter is a divinely powerful plea
recommending that Arjuna should, even while acting in
the world, continuously strive to be one living in the
awareness of the Divine, through a process of selfless
identification with the Eternal, Imperishable Purusha.
BY MERE MEDITATION HOW WILL WE GAIN THE
SPECIFIC MERITS THAT ARE PROMISED BY THE
SHRUTI AND THE SMRITI WHEN WE FOLLOW
CERTAIN NOBLE ACTIONS IN LIFE?

618

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

28. Whether fruit of merit is declared (in the scriptures) as
springing up from study of the VEDAS, from performance of
sacrifices, from practice of austerities, and from charity --beyond all these goes the YOGIN, who having known this (the
two 'paths' ) attains to the Supreme, Primeval (Essence) .
Here Krishna is emphasizing that meditation can be
undertaken by anyone who is even slightly capable of it,
because, the Lord explains, "WHATEVER MERITORIOUS
RESULTS ARE PROMISED IN THE SCRIPTURES TO
ACCRUE FROM THE STUDY OF THE VEDAS,
PERFORMANCE
OF
YAJNAS,
PRACTICE
OF
AUSTERITIES, AND SELFLESS CHARITY," a true Yogi,
meaning, a sincere meditator, gains them all. Besides, the
Lord is emphatic when He says, "THE YOGI EVER RISES
OVER ALL THESE." Attempts at meditation can integrate
the personality a million times more easily and quickly
than by the slower processes described above --- it being
understood that the devoted meditator has developed in
himself the necessary amount of dispassion, and
discriminative thinking. Even these can grow when
meditation is pursued regularly and sincerely.
When thus, a meditator who has, through meditation,
gained the results of selfless Karma and Upasanas,
continued his practices, he learns to soar higher and
higher, until at last he comes to realise "THIS," the
Imperishable Purusha, and ATTAINS TO THE
PRIMEVAL, SUPREME ABODE --- having attained
which, MY HIGHEST STATE, there is no return.
619

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the eightth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN.
Here the term "YOGA OF THE IMPERISHABLE
BRAHMAN" is to be understood as "THE WAY TO THE
IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN." After answering in this
chapter the questions raised by Arjuna, the Lord was
borne away on the high tides of His Divine inspiration, to
explain how those who can remember the Infinite at the
time of their departure from the body will reach the
Infinite. Therefore, He advised Arjuna to remember the
Infinite always and face his life diligently.
Naturally, Krishna has to explain what is the nature of
that Infinite upon which the seeker is to fix his singlepointed mind. We had thus, in stanzas 9 and 10, a set of
brilliant phrases, which, in their suggestive-ness, explain
the Inexplicable. Having described the Imperishable
BRAHMAN, Krishna explains the "Path-of-Light" and the
"Path-of-Darkness," the former leading to the
Imperishable, and the latter abducting the ego away from
its divine ]home into the 'house of pain and finitude.'
Rightly, indeed, has the chapter been captioned as "THE
WAY TO THE IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN."
Om Om Om Om Om
620

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 9
Raja Vidya Raja Guhya Yoga
The Yoga of Royal Knowledge and Royal Secret
The Blessed Lord said: 1. To you who do not cavil, I shall now
declare this, the greatest secret, the most profound knowledge
combined with experience (or realisation) ; which having
known, you shall be free from the sorrows of life.
Lord Krishna has found, in Arjuna, one who is really
anxious to evolve. Only, he wanted help from some
quarter, to develop in himself an intellectual conviction
for the way-of-life he was to pursue. The Lord says that
He will declare the philosophy of Arjuna, "WHO DOES
NOT CARP OR CAVIL," and the benefit of this
knowledge and its practical application has also been
indicated in this stanza; "HAVING KNOWN WHICH,
YOU SHALL BE FREE FROM ALL LIMITATIONS OF
FINITE EXISTENCE."
An individual becomes incapable of facing the challenges
of life and meeting its rising demands, because, in his false
estimation of things and beings, he comes to play out of
tune with the whole orchestra of life. To understand
ourselves and the world outside, is to know the secret of
621

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

keeping a healthy and happy relationship with the world
outside. He, who is capable of tuning himself up thus with
the whole, is the one who is marked out for sure success
and complete victory in life.
Because of his internal maladjustments, we found Arjuna,
the hero of his age, behaving as a shattered personality.
Such an individual, split in himself, comes to feel the
problems of life too heavy, the duties of life too irksome,
and life itself too much to bear. All those, who thus allow
the engine of life to run over them and crush them down,
are termed as Samsarins. Those who know the art of selfdevelopment can easily learn how to steer the engine of
existence from its driver's seat, safely around every
impediment, and they are the Men-of-Realisation, the
Saints, and the Sages. This status is the heritage of man --of every intelligent person, who has the enthusiasm and
the courage to master life and live like a God upon earth
ruling over the circumstances, and smiling at the
adversities.
TO GENERATE AN ALL-OUT ENTHUSIASM IN THE
ART OF LIVING, WHICH EACH STUDENT HAS TO
BRING ABOUT IN HIS OWN LIFE, THE ART OF SELFPERFECTION IS PRAISED IN THE FOLLOWING:
2. Royal Science, Royal Secret, the supreme purifier is this,
realisable by direct intuitive knowledge, according to the
DHARMA, very easy to perform, imperishable.
622

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Vedanta is no religion in the ordinary concept of the term,
which implies the formalistic observance of some physical
and mental discipline, in some House of God, during a
specific day of the week, for a prescribed length of time. If
we consider religion as an "Art of Right Action," then
Vedanta is indeed the noblest of religions, because it
provides a scientific explanation for the entire way of right
living. Krishna here glorifies it: "THIS IS THE ROYAL
SCIENCE, THE ROYAL MYSTERY, PURE AND VERY
HIGH."
Even if there be a Science, royal in its import, deep in its
profundity, and "supreme in its purifying effect," unless it
be available for our comprehension, it is almost useless.
Here, Krishna promises that it is "CLEARLY
COMPREHENSIBLE," since it can be apprehended
directly by an immediate experience of the Self.
Also it is a science "pertaining to Dharma" (Dharmyam).
The term Dharma has already been explained. Man is
nothing but a parcel of minerals in their gross and subtle
states, if the Conscious Principle were not blessing them
with awareness. This Awareness, called the Self, is then
the Dharma of man, the Principle of Life in him. the
Spiritual Science, that the Lord of Vrindavana promises to
enunciate in this chapter, is neither the physical science of
the biology of the objects of the world, nor the science of
psychology that explains the field of emotions and
thoughts --- but the Science of the Self, the deepest essence
in each individual.
623

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

VERY EASY TO PERFORM --- Religion is a subjective
technique to be pursued and accomplished by each in
himself. If this great science, into which Lord Krishna is
proposing to initiate Arjuna, is an extremely difficult
proposition in life, then, naturally, it is a futile philosophy.
The poverty of a country is not removed by the
declaration of its scientists that there are inexhaustible
quantities of unclaimed gold, awaiting free transportation,
on Mars! In order to remove this vague fear, it has been
fully confirmed that the technique of self-integration and
the ultimate gaining of complete mastery over oneself is
an art easy to master for the sincere and the diligent.
Even if it be easy, no intelligent man can pursue the path,
if the gain acquired thereby is perishable and temporary.
It is endorsed here that the gains acquired through a
faithful pursuit of this Royal Science of self-development
and self-mastery are "OF AN IMPERISHABLE NATURE."
To realise the Self is to become the Self, the Eternal, the
Infinite Reality behind the phenomenal world of
appearances.
AS A CONTRAST TO THOSE WHO ARE SEEKING, THE
DESTINY OF THOSE WHO ARE NOT SEEKING THE
IMPERISHABLE IS DECLARED TO BE THE DISTURBED
LIFE OF SAMSARA:

624

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

3. Persons without faith in this DHARMA (the Divine Self) ,
O Parantapa, without attaining Me, return to the path of
rebirth, fraught with death.
Those who live in complete disregard of the Self,
necessarily "RETURN WITHOUT ATTAINING ME." Men
of extroversion, meditating upon the sense objects and
bartering away their intellectual capacities, emotional
powers, and physical strength for seeking, acquiring and
possessing the implements to work out their sensual
satisfaction, must necessarily return to "THE PATH OF
REBIRTH, FRAUGHT WITH DEATH."
The more an individual meditates upon the finite, strives
to gain the changeable, and gets choked by the sorrows of
the perishable, the more he comes to worship and court
the lower nature of the Self, the Prakriti. However big the
ocean may be, a drop of it, taken from anywhere in its
infinite expanse, should taste saline. In the same way,
whatever be the motive behind the courting, once we
allow ourselves to be courtiers of the world-of-objects, we
are doomed to taste the saline tears of sorrow, because of
the very ephemeral nature of the "objects of our love."
The world of names and forms is finite and ever-changing.
At every moment, every object is living through a process
of change, and each change is death to the previous state
of existence of the object. Thus, the term "death" used here
by Krishna in his phrase "FRAUGHT WITH DEATH" is to
be understood in this liberal meaning of the term. In short,
625

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

courtiers of the finite reach the tragic realms of constant
death.
In the perfect Science of Vedanta, though Shraddha also
implies "faith" in the Tagorean sense of the term, it is not
built upon the misty vapours of emotionalism, but upon
the solid beams of intellectual understanding and perfect
awareness of the logic of thought behind the theory.
Shankara defines Shraddha as the "moulding of the life and
living, on the basis of right intellectual comprehension of
what the scripture indicates and the teachers explain." It is
the enduring faith that lifts us to realms beyond the reach
of the mind and intellect, and helps to carve out of the
mortal and the finite, the Immortal and the Infinite.
Something without which a substance cannot be that very
substance is called its Dharma or essence; e. g., heat in fire,
cold in ice. Those who have no faith in the Divine Essence,
which is the Self in them, get easily abducted by the
cooings of their emotions, or the barkings of their intellect,
or the whisperings of their flesh. They slip into devolution
and come to live as biped animals, when they lose their
faith in the Divine core which is the Essential Being. A
mad king, who has forgotten his own kingship, throws his
kingly dignity to the winds and runs about naked on the
streets, behaving as though he were a homeless vagabond.
Similarly, an individual, in his forgetfulness of the dignity
of his essential Self-hood, comes to live in the open streets
of sense pleasures, hunting for his satisfactions, as though
626

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

he were nothing better than a crawling worm in some
wayside ditch.
Simple-looking though it be, this stanza is pregnant with
untold suggestiveness. By contrasting thus the "Path-ofKnowledge" with the "Path-of-Ignorance" in the most
vivid terms, Krishna brings to the comprehension of
Arjuna the advisability of the blessed path of Higher
seeking, the realisation of the Imperishable.
IN THE FOLLOWING, KNOWLEDGE IS THEREFORE
GLORIFIED, WHEN KRISHNA EXPLAINS THAT
DHARMA, WHICH IS TO BE FOLLOWED IS:
4. All this world is pervaded by Me in My Unmanifest form
(aspect) ; all beings exist in Me, but I do not dwell in them.
ALL THIS WORLD IS PERVADED BY ME IN MY
UNMANIFESTED FORM --- The subtlety of a thing is
measured in terms of its pervasiveness and therefore, the
Subtlest must necessarily be the All-pervasive. As all
limited things must have forms, the All-pervasive alone
can be Eternal and Infinite. All forms are perishable
substances (Dravya). Thus the Self, in its essential
Unmanifest nature, must be pervading everything, as the
mud pervades all forms and shapes in all mud-pots.
If thus, the Infinite pervades the finite, what exactly is the
relationship between them? Is it that the finite rose from
627

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Infinite? Or is it that the Infinite PRODUCED the
finite? Has the Infinite Itself become the finite, as a
modification of Itself, or do they both, among themselves,
keep a father-son, or a master-servant relationship?
Various religions of the world abound in such questions.
The dualists can afford to indulge in such a fancied
picture of some relation or other between the finite and
the Infinite. But the Adwaitins (Non-dualists) cannot accept
this idea, since to them the Eternal Self alone is the ONE
and the ONLY REALITY.
The second line of this stanza is a classical description of
this "relationless-relationship" between the Real and
unreal. "All beings exist in Me but I dwell not in them." To
a hasty reader this would strike as an incomprehensible
paradox expressed in a jumble of empty words. But to one
who has understood well the theory of super-imposition,
this is very simple. The ghost-vision can come only upon
the post. And what exactly is the relationship between the
ghost and the post from the standpoint of the post? The
innocent post, in infinite love for the deluded fool, can
only make a similar statement as the Lord has made here.
"The ghost," the post would say, "is no doubt, in me, but I
am not in the ghost; and therefore, I have never frightened
any deluded traveller at any time." In the same fashion the
Lord says here, "I, IN MY UNMANIFEST NATURE, AM
THE SUBSTRATUM FOR ALL THE MANIFESTED" chaos
of names and forms, but neither in their joys nor in their
sorrows, neither in their births nor in their deaths, "AM I
628

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SHARING THEIR DESTINIES, BECAUSE I DO NOT
DWELL IN THEM."
This line sounds a faithful echo of the same idea, perhaps
more crisply expressed earlier (VII-12), where it was said
"I AM NOT IN THEM, THEY ARE IN ME." In short, it is
indicated here that the Self which, through Its
identification with the matter-envelopments, has come to
"DWELL IN THEM," is the pain-ridden mortal, while the
same Self which has successfully withdrawn all Its false
arrogations with the matter layers and has come to realise
that, "I DO NOT DWELL IN THEM" is the Self, Immortal
and Unmanifest.
THEN THERE MUST BE SOME SORT OF
EXISTENCE FOR THE FINITE IN THE INFINITE:

AN

5. Nor do beings exist (in reality) in Me --- behold My Divine
YOGA supporting all beings, but not dwelling in them, am I
My Self, the 'efficient-cause' of all beings.
Continuing the strain of His arguments in the previous
stanza here He says, "NOR DO THINGS EXIST IN ME,"
although "I DWELL NOT IN THEM." Now here he says
that in the Infinite, never has the finite ever risen!
Continuing our example of the post and the ghost this is
equivalent to the post declaring that, "in me, the electric
post, never has a ghost existed." In Pure Awareness, in Its
Infinite Nature of sheer Knowledge, there never was,
629

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

never is and can never be any world of pluralistic
embodiment, just as, for the waker, the pleasures of the
dream world ARE NEVER AVAILABLE. In short, at the
time of the direct subjective experience of the Self there is
no cognition of the pluralistic world, which is born out of
the forgetfulness of the Infinite.
The Self "BRINGS FORTH AND SUPPORTS ALL
BEINGS" just as the ocean gives birth to, supports and
nourishes all the waves in it. "AND YET," says Krishna "I,
MYSELF NEVER DWELL IN THEM." Just in the same
way the ocean can cry that "I am never the waves." The
mud is the womb of all pots, the sustainer of their shapes,
the nourisher of their forms, and yet, none of the pots, nor
all the pots put together, can ever define or give a total
knowledge of the mud. Pure Consciousness, Divine and
Eternal, is the Substratum that sustains and illumines the
entire panorama of the everchanging plurality.
The objects of the world conveying their stimuli through
the doors of the sense organs create mental waves which
are illuminated by the Conscious Principle residing in all
forms. If the Awareness is not there, the external world
must necessarily fail in giving the mind-and-intellect the
concept of its life as a series of unbroken experiences. Just
as the cotton is in the cloth, or the gold in all ornaments, or
the heat in the fire, so too, the Imperishable is in the
perishable. The dreamer can function only in the waker;
the waker pervades the dream-experiences, and at the
630

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

same time, the waker is not in the dream nor in fact, when
awakened fully, does the dream ever exist in the waker.
KRISHNA FEELS THAT THE LANGUAGE OF
PARADOX IS PROVING TOO MUCH OF A RIDDLE TO
THE GROSS INTELLECT OF THE AVERAGE MAN IN
ARJUNA, AND THEREFORE, IN HIS DIVINE
KINDNESS, THE LORD PROVIDES FOR HIS DISCIPLE
AN EXAMPLE:
6. As the mighty wind, moving everywhere, rests always in
space (the AKASHA ) , even so, know you, all beings rest in
Me.
The confused Prince, trying to solve the riddle, is helped
here by the Kingly Teacher in Krishna who gives him a
vivid example. To imagine a substance that exists
everywhere, allowing everything to exist in it, but at the
same time, it in itself not getting conditioned by the things
that exist in it, is very difficult, and the ordinary intellect
cannot easily soar to comprehend those heights of
understanding and appreciation. As a prop for the
ordinary intellect, to raise itself up so that it may peep
over its own limitations and gain a vision of the
unravelling expanse of the Infinite, here is a brilliant
example.
The gross can never condition the subtle. As the poet
sings, "Stone walls do not a prison make," for, even
631

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

though we may imprison the body of the prisoner, his
thoughts are ever free to reach his kith and kin at their
hearth. The gross stone walls cannot limit the flight of the
subtle thoughts. If once this principle is well understood
the example becomes very expressive exhibiting all its
secret suggestions.
KNOW YOU ARJUNA, that the winds curl, swirl and
whirl around everywhere in space; the space supports and
envelopes them everywhere, and yet, they do not ever
limit the space. This beautiful example, when meditated
upon by any seeker, if he has at least an average amount
of intellectual comprehension, will enable him to define,
in his own mind, the right relationship that exists between
the Self and the non-Self. The Real supports the unreal; the
unreal seemingly lives... through its history of misery and
sorrows, fleeting joys and passing pleasures... in the Real
and yet, the unreal can never condition the Real. When the
wind is moving, the space need never move. None of the
qualities of the wind is the quality of the space (Akasha).
Compared with the outstretching Infinite space, in which
the universes keep on revolving, at a speed measured in
light years, the atmospheric disturbances are only upto the
height of a few miles off the surface of the globe. In the
infinite vastness of the Real, the arena of disturbances
caused by Its flirtations with Its own assumed selfignorance, is only a negligible area... and even there, the
relationship between the false and the Real is the
relationship between the fickle breeze and the Infinite
space.
632

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

These two are stanzas not merely to be explained away by
words, however true the commentator may be; they are to
be meditated upon by the students, individually.
THEN WHAT ABOUT YOUR WONDERFUL THEORY
OF A SYSTEMATIC LAW OF REBIRTH --- THE STORY
OF A CREATOR CREATING THE WORLD DURING HIS
DAY-TIME --- AND DISSOLVING THE ENTIRE LOT
DURING HIS NIGHT-TIME, ETC.?... LISTEN:
7. All beings, O Kaunteya (O Son of Kunti) , go into My
PRAKRITI (nature) at the end of a KALPA; I send them forth
again at the beginning of (the next) KALPA.
8. Animating My PRAKRITI, I, again and again send forth all
this helpless multitude of beings, by the force of nature
(PRAKRITI) .
The Eternal Brahman functioning through the equipment
of the total mind is the God-principle, the Creator, and the
same Absolute Brahman functioning through the limited
individual mind-and-intellect is the individualised Self,
the mortal ego (Samsarin). The same Sun gets reflected in
the clear still waters of a vast lake and in the disturbed
muddy pool on the roadside; the difference between the
two distinctive reflections, in the different equipments,
will explain the difference between the individual-ego and
the God-principle. Just as the Sun in the sky can rightly
say: "I am the cause for the brilliant reflection in the lake
633

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and the broken, dull reflection in the wayside puddle," so
too Krishna, the Self declares: "I am the vital animating
Reality behind the Creator, and also behind the created."
The Adjunct of the God-principle, the total body-mindintellect equipment, constitutes the lower nature of the
Self, called the Prakriti. At the beginning of a cycle the
existing vasanas in the lower nature get projected "and at
the end of the Kalpa all beings go to My Prakriti."
The act of invigorating or fertilising the Prakriti to grow
up again into the tree-of-Samsara, is an act of grace from
Brahman. If the Supreme Consciousness were not to
identify with Prakriti, (Maya), she, being inert in herself,
cannot project forth any life at all. The entire multitude of
vasanas, "I project again and again." When the Self
animates Prakriti, the vasanas have no freedom at all to
refuse expression because, THEY ARE HELPLESS
UNDER THE SWAY OF PRAKRITI.
In philosophy, the Rishis often explain the Universe from
the standpoint of the macrocosm (Samashti) which has a
knack of confusing the students, unless each student
strives hard to understand its implications subjectively in
himself, as microcosm (Vyashti). Viewed thus, in the
individual subjective inner-life-story, the statement proves
to be indeed true, since without the life in us --- the Self --identifying with the lower nature in us, the mind and
intellect equipment cannot create the characteristic ego,
which comes to suffer its limited existence.
634

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

We have already found that the greatest scoundrel and the
noblest saint are both the same when neither of them is
identifying with his mind and intellect, in the state of deep
sleep. On waking up, the scoundrel-mind projects a
scoundrel, and the saintly-mind projects the saint; and the
Vitality behind both is the same Spark-of-Life,
Consciousness Absolute. Thus, the scoundrel is incapable
of not behaving as a scoundrel, as much as the saint
cannot, by any chance, play the scoundrel, even for a
moment. The scoundrel is as helpless as the saint, both
being "HELPLESSLY UNDER THE SWAY OF PRAKRITI"
in each. And the entire drama of the dissolution of vasanaexpressions and the projection of the vasana-dances is
performed upon the Changeless Imperishable Eternal
platform of the Self; "I PROJECT AGAIN."
THE LAW OF KARMA IS INCONTROVERTIBLE AS THE
ACTION SO THE REACTION. IF THE SELF
ADMINISTERS THE DISSOLUTION AND SUPERVISES
THE PROJECTION OF THE PLURALISTIC WORLD,
HOW FAR DOES THE LAW OF KARMA SHACKLE THE
INFINITE?... LISTEN:
9. Sitting like one indifferent, and unattached to these acts,
Dhananjaya, these acts do not bind Me.
In the case of the limited ego, its ego-centric actions leave
their impressions behind, which ultimately persecute the
little ego with their reactions. All ego-centric actions,
635

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

which are always motivated by selfish desires, leave their
ugly foot-prints upon the shores of the mind (Vasanas),
while actions which are not ego-motivated leave no trail
(Vasanas), as birds leave no foot-prints as they move along
in the sky. We can compare an ungrateful son kicking his
own father, with an innocent child in a playful mood
kicking his own father, with both its legs. A philosopher's
subtle vision is not necessary to understand the difference
in texture between these two persons performing the same
action --- kicking the father. Wherever and whenever an
ego-centric action, whipped by selfish desires, is
undertaken, gross and painful reactions (Vasanas) must
necessarily ensue.
In the case of Eternal animating Its Prakriti, and projecting
out "AGAIN AND AGAIN THE MULTITUDE OF
BEINGS," there is neither any attachment (Raga) nor any
aversion (Dvesha), and therefore, by this mere happening
on the Eternal, the Supreme is not affected: "THESE ACTS
DO NOT BIND ME." It is neither ego-centric nor desiremotivated.
However tragic and murderous the play may be, however
tearful and sad the story be, however rainy and stormy
the scene be, the white screen in the cinema hall at the end
of the play carries neither the marks of the blood spilt, nor
the stains of the tears shed, nor the wear and tear of the
storm that raged. At the same time, we all know that but
for the changeless screen, the story could never have been
unravelled through the medium of light and shade. In the
636

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

same fashion, the ever-pure Infinite, as the Self, becomes
the enduring platform for the drama of sorrow that is
expressed in the language of plurality, ceaselessly enacted
by the infinite number of egos, helplessly repeating the
parts ordered by their Vasanas, gathered by them in the
past.
The steam in the engine is not punished for the disaster of
derailment, nor is the steam complimented when the train
reaches its destination in time! Again, neither the disaster
nor the successful accomplishment of the journey could
ever take place without the steam. The engine without the
steam is inert iron assembled in a particular shape, dull
and heavy; it is the steam that dynamises and renders it
capable of its actions of cruel destruction, or kindly
construction, as the case may be. Since the steam in the
engine has neither an anxiety to move the train, nor an
aversion to move it, the steam is ignored in the
achievements of the train, whether good or bad. It is the
motive behind the action that determines its reaction.
The Self is the source of all dynamism. It dynamises the
mind. Each mind is a bundle of Vasanas. Good Vasanas
make the mind sing the song of joy and harmony. Bad
Vasanas in the mind make it groan with sobs and tears.
The needle in the gramophone is not responsible for the
song that the record sings. As the record, so the music.
Similarly, the Self is Eternal. It is unmindful of what type
of world is projected forth. Nor is It anxious in any sense
of the term, to create a better world. Sunlight illumines
637

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

whatever happens to be there in its light, be it a murder,
or be it a martyrdom. Neither the glory of the martyr, nor
the crime of the murderer can reach the Sun. The Self, as
Pure Consciousness, illumines the Vasanas and lends them
the capacity to project out, be it for the damnation of
themselves or for their own glorification. "SITTING LIKE
ONE INDIFFERENT AND UNATTACHED TO THESE
ACTS" the Self revels in the realm of Its lower nature
(Prakriti).
WHAT EXACTLY IS THIS STRANGE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE INFINITE AND THE FINITE? THE
FINITE ACTS BECAUSE OF THE INFINITE, AND YET
THE INFINITE IS SAID TO BE NEUTRAL... HOW?
10. Under Me as her Supervisor, PRAKRITI (nature) produces
the moving and the unmoving; because of this, O Kaunteya, the
world revolves.
In Vedanta, this relationship between the actionless Self
and the active non-Self has been brought out by a bunch
of analogies, each one trying to throw much light upon
this sacred tie of 'relationless-relationship.'
The rays of the Sun warm up the objects upon which they
fall, without warming the intervening medium through
which they pass. Similarly, the Self remains in Its own
Infinite glory, and the non-Self gets dynamised to act, as
Prakriti, in the mere "presence" of the Self.
638

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The king gets a fancy that he should visit a given pilgrim
centre on the full-moon day of the following month, and
having expressed this intention to his minister, the king
forgets all about it. But on the day prior to the following
full-moon, the minister approaches the king to remind
him that it is time for the royal procession. The next day,
when the king comes out, he finds that the entire route is
thronged with his subjects. Welcoming arches are raised at
different places. All detailed arrangements are planned
out and colourfully executed for his royal visit, and
return. All the officers and subjects have poured out all
their capacities and endeavour to make the royal trip to
the temple a great success.
In all these feverish activities, everyone gained his
authority and power only because of the king, and yet, the
king himself was nowhere in the picture. The minister had
his sanction from the king, and therefore, his orders were
faithfully executed by all others. Had the minister tried to
organise such a show as an ordinary citizen, he would
never have succeeded. Similarly, in the mere presence of
the Self, Prakriti borrows her sanction to plan and to
execute, to act and to achieve.
Subjectively, this becomes more clear. The Atman, merely
by Its "presence" illumines the mind and intellect and
creates for the expression of their Vasanas an entire field of
world-objects and the required instruments of experience,
constituted of the organs-of-perception and the organs-ofaction. "NATURE, WHILE I PRESIDE, GIVES BIRTH TO
639

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE WORLD OF THINGS AND BEINGS" --- "Nature"
here means "The Unmanifest, that gets projected forth as
the manifest."
The continued dance of the world-of-plurality to the
rhythm of change and death is maintained in the
"presence" of the Self; "THE WORLD WHIRLS ROUND
AND ROUND BECAUSE OF THIS." In the final analysis,
the Self does nothing. It is the Prakriti that projects and
executes; the Prakriti that gets animated in the proximity
of the Self. It is the Light of the Self that vitalises the
Prakriti and makes her exist and act. That is all the
relationship between the Self, the Purusha and the nonSelf, the Prakriti.
This will become more clear if the student tries to
understand this relationship exactly as the relationship
that can exist between the wayside post and the ghost that
is superimposed upon it by the deluded.
IF THE SELF BE THUS THE ESSENTIAL REALITY IN
EVERY FORM AND IF IT BE EVER FREE FROM THE
SORROWS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FINITE, WHY
IS IT THAT ALL BEINGS ARE NOT ABLE TO IDENTIFY
THEMSELVES WITH IT AND EXIST AS THE SELF?...
LISTEN:
11. Fools disregard Me when I dwell in human form; they know
not My Higher being as the Great Lord of all beings.
640

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In the seventh chapter, while giving a discourse upon the
"Higher" and "Lower" natures of the Eternal, Krishna
declared that the FOOLISH, in their ignorance of the
Supreme State of the Higher Self, as Immutable and
Transcendental, regard the "Unmanifest" as having come
into manifestation. In this chapter while claiming to be the
Self in all, Krishna uses the same strong word, 'fools,' to
condemn those who cling to the form and lose the essence.
"UNAWARE OF MY HIGHER NATURE, FOOLS
REGARD ME" as dwelling in a particular form only!
To mistake the idol for God, or the form of the Guru for
the Infinite, is to mistake the container for the contents. An
idol is only a symbol (Pratika) for an imperceptible and
subtle Truth. To play with the milk-bottle is not to feel
refreshed when one is hungry or thirsty; playing with a
spoon and fork over an empty plate is no satisfaction
when one is really hungry. To mistake the idol to be itself
the goal is to mistake the means for the end. And such a
misunderstanding alone breeds fanatics, who sow seeds of
rivalry and jealousy, to reap, in time, a harvest of death
and disaster, all in the name of their stone-deities,
wooden-symbols, or brass-gods! Three tiny bits of
coloured khadi-cloth may make the national-flag, but that
is not my mother-land; but when I bow my head as my
country's flag goes up, I am adoring my nation; the flag is
the sacred symbol of my country's culture and its
aspirations.

641

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

With this idea in mind, if we read the stanza it becomes
very vivid and clear. The Lord says: "ordinary devotees
are unaware of My real status 'AS THE GREAT LORD OF
ALL BEINGS'," and adds that these deluded "FOOLS
SCORN ME WHEN I DWELL IN HUMAN FORM,"
meaning, when they consider Him, the Self, as merely a
human-form, which He may take for Himself, to bless a
particular generation.
WHY ARE THE FOOLS RENDERED INCAPABLE OF
RIGHT
UNDERSTANDING
AND
CORRECT
JUDGEMENT REGARDING THE TRUE NATURE OF
THE SELF?
12. Of vain hopes, of vain actions, of vain knowledge, and
senseless, they verily are possessed of the delusive nature of
RAKSHASAS and ASURAS.
13. But the MAHATMAS (great-souls) O Partha, partaking of
My divine nature, worship Me with a single mind (with a mind
devoted to nothing else) , knowing Me as the Imperishable
Source of all beings.
In order to drive home an argument, it is the style in
Krishna's discourses that He always brings the contrasting
factors together so that each may come to shine all the
more against the background supplied by the other. Here
is a pair of stanzas in which, if the former explains the low
men deluded to pursue their baser nature (Rakshasas and
642

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Asuras), the latter paints the picture of the great-souls
(Mahatmas), possessed of all the divine qualities.
Deluded by false desires and wearied with false activities
to fulfil those wrong desires, some become confused in
intellect and totally confounded in their reasoning. Such
people lose all divine perspective and become monstrous
in their activities, expressing nothing but their demoniac
sensuous nature at all times. Such men are called here as
Rakshasas and Asuras, belonging to the tradition of Ravana.
The actions undertaken in the present leave their
impressions on the mind, and order the future desires and
thoughts in the individual. Out of vain actions, only
negative Vasanas can arise, and they can only thicken the
dull-witted stupidities of the intellect. When an individual
has lived in this ditch of falsehood and impurity, he
cannot become any nobler than a monster, in the eyes of
the "wise".
As a contrast to this Rakshasa-culture, we are shown how
men-of-Wisdom feel and act. This dissection of man's
bosom reveals to the seekers of self-development, the right
attitude they must adopt and the correct perspective with
which they must look at the things of the world.
THE GREAT-SOULS POSSESSED OF THE DIVINE
NATURE of the Self, and desiring this Infinite, seek the
Immortal by realising the Self, "THROUGH SINGLEPOINTED SELF-APPLICATION." They "know Me to be
643

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Origin of all beings"; and those who know the mud to
be the origin of all mud-pots, cannot fail to see the mud in
all pots. So too, the true children of the Hindu culture,
who understand the Divine Principle as the "Source-of-allbeings," cannot but respect every other member of the
society as they would respect themselves. There is no
greater and more effective socialism ever preached in the
world. If the present generation is not able to understand
the appreciate this spiritual socialism, which is the only
panacea for the ills of the world, the reason for it has been
already given in the preceding stanza --- it is because of
the predominance of the Asuric forces in it.
THE GREAT-SOULS "WORSHIP
SINGLE-POINTED MIND."... HOW?

ME

WITH

THE

14. Always glorifying Me, striving, firm in vows, prostrating
before Me, and always steadfast, they worshipMe with devotion.
Even though in the previous stanza, while describing the
high-souls, (a) the "Path-of-Knowledge" was indicated,
here the other two main "Paths" of self-integration and
self-development are hinted at, viz., (b) single-pointed
devotion and (c) selfless activity undertaken in the true
Yajna-spirit.
GLORIFYING ME ALWAYS --- The grossest type of
glorification is done usually by a noisy crowd singing the
Lord's glories with the accompaniment of equally noisy
644

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and crude instruments! But the implication of Kirtana is
much more sacred. Indeed, to adore an ideal with
reverence and devotion, and to sing His glories, at all
times, continuously, is the silent act of a mind that has
fully opened up to appreciate the ideal that one has learnt
to glorify. The silent adoration of society by the socialworkers, or the steady flow of love that beams out from a
man of Knowledge for the entire kingdom of the living,
constitute a greater and a more potent type of Kirtana,
than the type indulged in by the noisy crowds that
assemble from their different fields of dubious activities,
for a short period each day, only to return to the same
dens of vices, after the Bhajana.
STRIVING WITH FIRM RESOLVE --- These are simple
logical facts that are generally overlooked by the seekers
and they dig the graves for their own success in spiritual
practices. The majority of people believe that some specific
routine acts of devotional flavour pursued physically for a
short period of time on particular days of the week, is all
their part of the game. The rest is for their imaginary gods
to cook and bring in front of them, dressed to taste! This
absurd, superstitious idea has nothing to do with the
Science of Self-perfection, of which religion constitutes its
technical aspect.
Constant and conscious effort is unavoidable if an
individual is to get himself hauled out from his present
ruts of wrong thinking and false valuations of life and
living. The disharmony he experiences in life, and the
645

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

wrong notes that are sung by the situations in life upon
the harp of his heart are all due to the maladjustments in
his instruments-of-experience. Their readjustment calls for
continuous vigilance, non-stop self-application, and
sincere pursuit.
Of course, while thus striving for self-redemption,
vacillations caused by instinctive biological temptations
would often reach the seeker to whisper in his ears and
make him eat the 'FORBIDDEN FRUIT.' But at such
moments of strong temptations, he must make a firm
resolve (Dhridha-Vratah) to reject the false and to walk
steadily the path-of-the-Real.
True devotion is unalloyed love. Love is measured in
terms of the lover's identification with the beloved.
Devotion to "ME, THE ORIGIN OF BEINGS, AND THE
IMMUTABLE" is the way for the deluded ego to identify
itself with the Self. And this is brought to a successful
culmination only by the process of detaching itself from
its non-Self conditionings. This negative aspect of selfwithdrawal from the layers of the non-Self is indicated by
the "BOWING DOWN TO ME." The positive side of the
art of Self-realisation is pursued, when, with a steady
single-pointed mind, the seeker comes to meditate till,
ultimately, he re-discovers for himself his total
identification with the Self. This positive aspect is
indicated by the phrase: "IN DEVOTION."

646

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The withdrawal of ourselves from our misconceived
identities and the final re-discovery of our infinite
potentialities, through our constant devotion to the Self,
can be achieved only by those among us who "ARE
STEADFAST AND
WORSHIP ME."
The "Path-of-Knowledge" knows no flower-throwing or
chandana-sprinkling methods of ritualistic worship. To
keep in the mind an alert and vigilant flow of thoughts in
our adoration for the nature of the Self as the Substratum
of the entire Universe and the Essence in all beings is the
truest worship that can open up the buds of our egocentric lives into blossoms of God-men, wafting their
fragrance of Perfection around.
15. Others also, offering the "Wisdom-sacrifice" worship Me,
regarding Me as One, as distinct, as manifold --- Me, who in all
forms, faces everywhere.
Jnana Yajna has no ritualism. It is a constant attempt on the
part of the performer to see, in and through the
experienced names and forms, the expression and vitality
of the One Conscious Principle, the Self. The seeker here,
practising Jnana Yajna has understood the significance of
the Vedantic assertion that the Immutable Self pervades
all, penetrating everything, and in Its homogeneous web
647

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of existence, It holds together the phenomenal multiplicity
and their variegated inter-actions.
Chocolates made by different firms, irrespective of their
shapes and colours, flavours and prices, are all chocolates
and, therefore, their essential nature of sweetness is
common to all of them; and the child who is seeking the
sweetness of the chocolates will enjoy them, whatever be
their shape, size, or packing.
Similarly, a seeker of the Self watches for, observes and
detects the expression of the Self in all forms and names,
in all situations and conditions. Whatever be the setting in
which diamonds are held together, to a diamond
merchant all of them are so many points of brilliance and
light, and he evaluates them according to the light-content
in each one of them and not the design or beauty of the
ornament.
A man of realisation moves about the world, seeing his
own Self, expressed through every movement and action,
word and thought that clusters round him at all times. Just
as one light in the midst of a thousand mirrors comes to
provide crores of reflections everywhere, so too, the one
centred in the Self, when he walks out into the world, sees
everywhere his own Self dancing, shooting glances at him
from all around at once, thrilling him always with the
homogeneous ecstasy of perfection and bliss.

648

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In the sparkle of the eyes, in the smile of a friend, in the
grin of an enemy, in the harsh words of jealousy and in
the soft tones of love, in heat and in cold, in success and in
failure --- among men, among animals, amidst the trees
and in the company of the inert, everywhere, he
successfully gains the auspicious vision of the Supreme,
either as EXISTENCE PURE or as KNOWLEDGE
ABSOLUTE or as BLISS INFINITE!! This is the meaning of
Ishwara Darshana or the Atma Darshana which is sung so
gloriously in all the scriptures of the world. To watch for
and discover the smile of the Divine through the trellis of
names and forms is to live in the constant spirit of Jnana
Yajna.
To adore Him in all visions, to recognise Him in all
situations, to feel Him with each thought, is to live in a
constant remembrance of the Self, and therefore, such
people "worship the Self through the wisdom-sacrifice
(Jnana Yajna)."
In the beginning, this attempt of seeing the Self is a
conscious act, not without its unpleasant strain. But as the
seeker develops in his own spiritual cognition of the Self,
the Awareness Divine within him, it becomes easy for him
to recognise the One Self splashing Itself upon the myriad
forms of Its own effulgent glory: "ME, WHO IN ALL
FORMS FACES UP EVERYWHERE."
The Man-of-Realisation not only experiences the Pure Self,
uncontaminated by the pluralistic equipments, but, also
649

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

recognises the same Self as playing through the endless
variety of conditionings available in the universe. Having
known the one Sun in the sky, even if we see a thousand
reflections of the same in different equipments, in all of
them, we see and recognise only the one Sun.
According to Vedanta, Self-realisation is not at all complete
if the realised one can keep his composure and equanimity
only in solitude and silence; if he recognises and
experiences the Divine only at some rare moments of his
transcendental experiences, then he is not the Man-ofWisdom glorified by the Rishis of the Upanishads. This is
not the way of the Yogis. A Man-of-true-Knowledge is he
to whom the Self alone is the Truth within, without, and
everywhere. "The One pervades all and nothing pervades
It." To him a market place of the busiest tensions is as
much a conducive place for cognising the Self as the quiet
Himalayan valleys and their deep caves of roaring silence.
With his eyes shut, he, from the balcony of the Infinite in
himself, gazes out to experience nothing but his own Self
everywhere.
In my legs as well as in my hands, I pervade equally at all
moments. I know I am there. To say that this knowledge
makes my hands and legs disappear, as mist disappears at
sunrise, is sheer lunacy and not the assertion of a true
science. Just as I permeate, exist, enjoy, and experience in
and through every little portion of my body, all through
my waking hours, at one and the same time, so too, the
man-of-Realisation realises that at all times, his own Self
650

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

permeates the entire universe, in His Infinite domain --"AS ONE, AS DISTINCT, AS MANIFOLD."
Vedanta preaches the recognition of Divinity and the
experience of the Infinite in and through life. It is not a
passing experience lived through an accidental
movement. It is not an occasion to celebrate by
distributing laddus and then to retire for ever from that
experience. Just as the knowledge acquired by an
individual through his education keeps him constant
company, at all times and in all conditions --- even in his
dream --- even so, nay, much more powerfully, much
more intimately, much more irredeemably, the "knowerof-the-Self becomes the Self"; there is no doubt about it.
The truth of the Vedantic declaration is upheld by the
assertion in the second line: "ME, THE ALL-FORMED,
THEY WORSHIP, AS ONE, AS DISTINCT AND AS
FACING EVERYWHERE, IN EACH FORM."
All that we have so far said is being endorsed here. No
doubt, through meditation, when the mind is stilled, the
Pure Self, the One-without-a-second, is realised. The
knower of the mud can easily recognise the mud in all
pots; the shape, size and colour of the pot do not destroy
the mud. Similarly, the apparent and delusory names and
forms, superimposed upon the Truth, cannot and do not
veil the Truth from the "vision" of the Man-of-Truth. Not
only does the Seer recognise the Self in each individual
separately, but Krishna, the upholder of Vedanta thunders
that the Truth is recognised "IN EACH FORM, AS
651

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

FACING EVERYWHERE." It is absurd to say that one
discovers the essential nature of the pot only on the righthand bottom of the mud-pot! The mud is in the pot, facing
everywhere, at all times; where the mud is not, there the
pot is non-existent. When the Self is not, there, the
perception of the multiple existence is never possible.
IF, IN A VARIETY OF FORMS, DIFFERENT TYPES OF
WORSHIP ARE PERFORMED, HOW DO THEY ALL
BECOME THE WORSHIP OF THE ONE SELF?
16. I am the KRATU; I am the sacrifice; I am the offering (food)
to PITRIS (or ancestors) ; I am the medicinal herb, and all
plants; I am the MANTRA I am also the clarified butter; I am
the fire; I am the oblation.
Repeating the idea already expressed earlier in a famous
stanza in the Geeta, (IV-24) this verse expresses how the
Self is the existence everywhere, in all actions and factors
constituting actions. Ritualistic actions constitute worship.
At the time of the Mahabharata, divine worship was
always undertaken in Vedic ritualism (Kratu), by ritualistic
adoration of the deity as prescribed in the Smriti (Yajna),
or by food-offerings for the ancestors (Swadha). Arjuna is
here taught that all these methods of worship are, in a
sense, nothing but the worship of the Self.
Not only are the different ritualistic prescriptions all
presided over by the Self, but the medicinal herbs
652

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

(Oushadha) used in the sacrifice, the ghee (Ajya --- clarified
butter) poured into the altar-of-fire the oblations (Hutam)
offered, the fire (Agni) that is invoked, the mantras chanted
--- all of them are nothing but the Self alone expressed
through different equipments in different fields. When a
variety of ornaments is made from a mass of gold, the
gold can certainly say that "I am the pendant, I am the
ring, I am the chain, I am its shine, I am its hook; I alone
am its shape and its glory." Similarly, the Self, being the
essence of all happenings and circumstances in which the
devotee attempts to adore the Eternal, this assertion here
is perfectly acceptable to all philosophic-minded readers.
AGAIN:
17. I am the Father of this world, the Mother, the supporter and
the grandsire; the (one) Thing to be known, the Purifier, (the
syllable) OM, and also the RIK, the SAMA and the YAJUH
also.
The Self is not a vague imperceptible Spirit of Existence in
all fields of divine activities --- sans-emotion, sansrelationship, sans-qualities. In order to show that there is
an ardour of love that permeates the very essence of the
Self everywhere, the finite relationships of the world are
mentioned to indicate the mass of love that the Self is. "I
AM THE FATHER, THE MOTHER, THE SUSTAINER,
THE GRANDSIRE, THE PURIFIER OF THE WORLDS."
653

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The verse insists, "I AM THE ONE THING TO BE
KNOWN" --- and this is the repeated assertion in all the
scriptures. The Self is "That, having known which,
everything else becomes known." To know the Self is to
destroy the consciousness of imperfection, the existence
finite, the sorrows poignant. To live in the ego, as a mere
embodied self, is to live self-exiled from all the Divine
potentialities that one is heir to. To re-discover this infinite
Beatitude is the only satisfying end and goal of life, where
alone an awakened intellect can discover a haven of peace
and an enduring existence in perfect tranquillity.
The Self, the Substratum of the entire universe, is
symbolised by the Vedic mantra called Omkara. Life is
conceived of as 'the flow during our waking, dreaming,
and deep-sleep states.' The Substratum for these three
states and their experiences must be something other than
these three, inasmuch as the rider is always different from
the ridden, the container is different from the contents.
The Substratum is different from the superimposition
upon it.
This fourth-state, supporting and embracing the three
ordinary states of consciousness in every one of us, is
termed as Turiya by the Upanishad Seers. The one symbol
representing all these four states is called Omkara, and
naturally, therefore, the Ultimate indicated by OM, is the
Self, conceived of, for the purpose of worship, as Krishna
in Shrimad Bhagavata.
654

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Self is the Essence indicated by OM, and this Absolute
Reality is the One theme, tacitly expressed, or indirectly
implied, in all the Vedas, and therefore, it is said "I AM
ALSO THE RIK, SAMA AND YAJUH."
FURTHER:
18. I am the Goal, the Supporter, the Lord, the Witness, the
Abode, the Shelter, the Friend, the Origin, the Dissolution, the
Foundation, the Treasure-house and the Seed Imperishable.
Continuing the theme of the status of the Self as the very
essence behind the seeming plurality of the world --recognised in our ignorance, and in fact nothing but a
dreamy superimposition gathering its existence from the
Reality behind it --- the Lord describes Himself with a host
of suggestive words strung together to form this exquisite
verse, pregnant and full, for all students of meditation.
I AM THE GOAL (Gati) --- All our seeking ends when all
imperfections vanish in the total experience of the Perfect.
To one frightened by the vision of a delusory serpent in a
piece of rope, consolation and satisfaction can come only
when his delusion has ended by the discovery of the rope.
The Self is the Substratum of the sorrow-ridden universe
of multiplicity; to realise the Self is to transcend all the
choking sense of limitations. The Knowledge-Absolute by
gaining which all becomes known, is shown here as the
Self.
655

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

I AM THE SUPPORTER (Bharta) --- Just as the desert
supports the illusory pool of water, which the thirsty
traveller sees in his delusion, so too, the Self is the
Supporter of everything. As Absolute-Existence It lends a
semblance of reality to the perceptions of the sense organs,
and thus holds together the flood-of-change into a
consistent pattern, called life.
I AM THE LORD (Prabhu) --- Even though the Self thus
lends Its grace to the realm of imperfections sustained and
maintained by the agitations of the mind, as the Pure
Awareness, It is ever beyond the sorrows and joys of the
apparent and illusory universe. Through different
equipments, electricity may pass, manifesting different
expressions of its own glory, but in none of them does
electricity lose itself, if we consider the current as pure
energy.
In all this panorama of expressions, the Self, though It
lends Existence to them, Itself remains as a mere Witness.
"I am the Witness" (Sakshi) --- he is considered a true
witness of an incident, "who is not in the incident, but
who happened to witness it, not from too far, with neither
attachment nor aversion." When things happen of their
own accord in one's presence then one becomes the
witness of that happening. The Infinite is but a witness of
the finite inasmuch as the Self is an uninterested
illuminator of what is happening in the harem of the
intellect, in the arena of the mind, in the courtyard of the
body, and in the wide expanse of the world without.
656

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

I AM THE ABODE (Nivasah) --- Truth is the House of all,
of every being and thing. On an innocent wayside post, it
is reported that some travellers saw a grinning ghost,
others a smiling ghost, and yet others, a ghost with a
bleeding mouth and sparkling eyes, naked and horrid,
and some an innocent ghost, dressed in white, invitingly
smiling and lovingly guiding them onto the right track.
All of them saw delusory projections of their individual
minds upon the same wayside post. Naturally, the post is
the "Abode," of the smiling, of the grinning, of the
bleeding, of the horrid, and of the tender ghost, that
different minds, on different occasions, projected upon the
same post. Similarly, wherever our equipments of
experiences gain the apprehension of the pluralistic
phenomena, for all of them the Self, the Awareness, is the
ABODE, the place of existence and security.
I AM THE REFUGE (Sharanam) --- Delusion breeds
sorrows, Knowledge produces joy. The universe is painridden because it is delusion-projected. Naturally, the
harbour of tranquillity, projecting a confused ego from the
mountainous breakers of the stormy ocean-of-samsara is
the rediscovery of the Substratum, the Essence of Self.
When once the Self gets individualised, when it walks out
to identify with the play, through the equipments of the
intellect, mind and body, it is wandering away from the
safety of the shore into the stormy, high seas of adventure.
When the frail boat of the ego is thus threatened from all
sides --- the darkening clouds above, the bumping sea
below, and the screaming storms all round --- the sailor's
657

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

only refuge is to come back to the tranquil harbour, the
Self!
The above descriptions put together, add up to give the
conception of the Reality as a heartless noumenon, a
dignified deity, an un-approachable realm of Perfection.
To wipe off this idea from the tender heart of emotional
seekers --- and Arjuna was one --- the Eternal, in the form
of the beloved friend of man, Krishna, is using here more
humane terms in defining himself.
I AM THE FRIEND (Suhrit) --- The Infinite is a friend of
the finite, not a nodding acquaintance from whom you
can borrow a match-box, but a friend, whose only anxiety
is for the security and the well-being of the befriended.
I AM THE ORIGIN AND DISSOLUTION, THE
SUBSTRATUM, THE STOREHOUSE --- As gold in all
ornaments and mud in all pots, the Self is in the whole
universe, and therefore, all things can come to
manifestation from and dissolve into the unmanifest, the
substratum, which can hence be considered as the "the
storehouse" of all names, forms and qualities that
constitute the multiple world.
I AM THE IMMUTABLE SEED (Beejam Avyayam) --- There
is a contrast here with all other seeds, which perish when
they germinate and produce trees. The Self is no doubt the
Origin of the "Tree-of-Samsara," but in the production of
this tree, the Self is not transformed, It being ever
658

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Immutable. The idea of the Eternal Principle, modifying
itself to become the created world is a disgrace to the logic
of human thinking, and Vedanta discards such a
philosophically fallacious notion. The dualists, however,
are compelled to take it up, or else, the very edifice of their
arguments will crumble down like a castle of clouds, built
upon an autumnal sky.
This, as we have already indicated, is a verse replete with
simple terms, each an avenue for the meditator to reflect
upon, and in a pleasant stroll reach the gateway
of Truth.
FURTHER:
19. (As Sun) I give heat; I withhold and send forth the rain; I
am Immortality and also death, both Existence and Nonexistence, O Arjuna.
I GIVE HEAT --- The electricity can rightly say that it
gives heat in the heater, light in the bulb, cold in the
refrigerator, because electricity conditioned through those
equipments expresses itself as the above-mentioned --heat, light and cold. Similarly, the Self, the one Existence,
identifying with the phenomenon called the Sun becomes
the source of all heat for the entire universe.

659

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

I WITHHOLD AND SEND FORTH RAIN --- Not only do
the modern meteorologists understand the influence
which the Sun has upon the climatic conditions of the
world, but the Rishis of old too had a perfect knowledge of
the ways and behaviour of nature, and had well
understood that the position, condition and nature of the
Sun determines the climate that comes to bless, or curse,
the world. The influence of the Sun controls the fields of
experience of every living creature on the globe, since it
controls the climatic conditions. If the Sun were to send
out a few more degrees of heat the entire flora and fauna
of the world would change. So too, will be the
transformation, complete and total, of the entire look of
the world, if the Sun were to withhold even a few calories
of the heat that it is radiating now. Immediately, there
would be a march from the north pole and the south pole
towards the equator, driving men and beings towards the
central belt of the globe, causing more intense sorrows of
over-population and lack of sufficient food!
I AM IMMORTALITY AND ALSO DEATH --- If life, the
Consciousness, were not illumining experiences, it would
become meaningless and purposeless, and the Self, being
the Spark of life, is the essential stuff that gives a realistic
experience of existence to the very phenomenon of death.
To realise the Self as the Immutable and the Eternal, is
to reach the State of Immortality. Change is death, and
therefore, the phrase is to be understood as saying that
660

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"the Self is the illuminator of change, Itself ever the
Changeless."
I AM EXISTENCE AND NON-EXISTENCE --- To perceive
and experience 'Existence' and 'Non-existence,' a positive
illuminator of both is necessary, and the illuminating
Consciousness must be able to embrace both Sat and Asat
in its all-comprehending Knowledge. It is impossible to
know and gain an experience of the total Non-existence;
wherever we experience Non-existence, we experience it
as "the Non-existence that exists."
Apart from this highly subtle philosophical interpretation
there is a simpler significance for the phrase. Sat and Asat
are terms used in Vedanta to indicate the 'cause' and
'effect': the UNMANIFEST and the MANIFEST. The Self
being that Illuminating Factor --- without which we can
experience neither the unmanifest (THOUGHTS) nor the
manifest (OBJECTS) --- the Self Eternal is conceived of as
the Essence in both the manifest and the unmanifest.
Without the mud, no pot is possible; with mud all pots
can exist; and therefore, the mud can claim: "I am the pots
of all sizes, shapes and colours."
This stanza can provide a lifetime inspiration to the
meditators at their seat of contemplation, while "barrelling
their thoughts," before shooting forth into the voiceless
and Nameless.

661

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THOSE WHO DEVOTE THEMSELVES IN THE
WORSHIP OF THE ETERNAL WITH DESIRES, WILL
COME TO THEIR FULFILMENT... HOW?
20. The Knowers of the three VEDAS, the drinkers of SOMA ,
purified from sin, worshipping Me by sacrifices, pray for the
way to heaven; they reach the holy world of the Lord-of-the-gods
and enjoy in heaven the Divine pleasures of the gods.
21. They, having enjoyed the vast heaven-world, when their
merits are exhausted, enter the world-of-the-mortals; thus
abiding by the injunctions of the three (VEDAS) , desiring
(objects of) desires, they attain to the state of "going-andreturning" (SAMSARA) .
When those who are well-read in the three Vedas and who
know the prescriptions laid down for the rituals, perform
those sacred acts of devotion and sacrifice with a desire to
enjoy the celestial bliss, "THEY COME TO ENJOY, IN
HEAVEN, THE DIVINE PLEASURES OF THE DEVAS."
The Soma drink is the milky juice of a creeper-plant which
is used in the rituals and taken in very small quantities at
the end of the function. Thus, the phrase "DRINKING
THE SOMA-JUICE" is to be understood as 'when the
performance of the ritual has concluded.' These desireprompted ritualisms yield finite results and Krishna
indicates that these ego-centres, after having enjoyed in
662

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the celestial realms, "ENTER THE MORTAL WORLD ON
EXHAUSTION OF THEIR MERITS."
The disgust which the Lord feels for such men and their
unintelligent seeking for the finite, is clearly expressed
when He concludes how these ritualists, "ABIDING BY
THE INJUNCTIONS OF THE THREE VEDAS, DESIRING
DESIRES. THEY REPEATEDLY COME AND GO."
WHAT ABOUT THOSE MEN WHO WORSHIP THE
ETERNAL WITH DESIRELESS LOVE, AS THE
SUBSTRATUM FOR THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE?
22. To those men who worship Me alone, thinking of no other, to
those ever self-controlled, I secure for them that which is not
already possessed (YOGA) by them, and preserve for them what
they already possess (KSHEMA) .
Here is a stanza which, with equal emphasis, discloses a
secret by which glorious success can be assured for the
spiritual as well as the material seekers. It is significant
that this stanza is almost in the centre of the Geeta. We
shall try to follow the implications, both spiritual as well
as secular, of this stanza, one by one.
Those who, with a single-pointed mind, thus meditate
upon Him as the One and the Only Reality behind the
entire universe, Krishna promises here that "TO THEM
EVER SELF-CONTROLLED, I BRING YOGA AND
663

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

KSHEMA," meaning more and more spiritual vigour
(Yoga) and the final experience of Beatitude (Kshema)
which is liberation
resulting from the fulfilled Yoga.
Now, considering it as a tip for the men in the marketplace, sweating and toiling in the world, the very same
stanza yields a code of secret instructions by which they
can assure for themselves complete success in their
worldly life. In any undertaking, if a man is capable of
pouring out his self-willed thought (sankalpa) constantly
and with a singleness-of-purpose, he is sure to succeed.
But unfortunately, the ordinary man is not capable of
successfully keeping his thoughts in one channel of
thinking. Therefore, his goal seems to be ever receding
and flickering. His determination to achieve a particular
goal ever changes, since his goal itself seems to be everchanging. To such a man of haphazard determination, no
progress is ever possible in any line of undertaking.
The greatest tragedy of the age seems to be that we ignore
the obvious fact that thoughts alone create. Activities gain
a potency from the thought-power that feeds them. When
the feeder behind is choked and dissipated, the executionpower in the external activities becomes feeble in strength
and efficiency. Thoughts, from a single-pointed mind,
must flow steadily in full inspiration, enthusiasm and
vigour towards the determined goal which the individual
has chosen for himself in life.
664

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Mere thinking, in itself, is not sufficient. No doubt, actions
are necessary. Many of the present-day youths, though
capable of consistently maintaining a goal-of-life in their
intellect, are not ready to get into the field and act as best
as they can for its achievement. The term 'Upasana' means
"worship." Through worship we invoke the deity,
meaning "the profit potential in any given field" and the
prefix Pari to this familiar term 'Upasana,' indicates a totaleffort in which no stone is left unturned for carving out
one's victories in one's field of endeavour.
So far, two main secret factors without which success in
life will not be assured are revealed --- (a) CONSISTENCY
OF WILLING AND THINKING, and (b) POURING OUT
OURSELVES WITH A SINGLENESS OF PURPOSE in
meeting the situation in its entirety. The third main factor
that is essential in the constitution of one who is marked
out for spectacular success and brilliant gains in life is (c)
SELF-CONTROL.
As an aspiring individual, consistently maintaining his
ambition in mind, walks out into his fields of activity to
battle with the immediate problems, he will meet with
many a tempting channel of more fascinating plans,
through which he can dissipate himself and get
exhausted, rendering himself incapable of conquering the
highest success in his own field. To keep oneself SELFCONTROLLED, so that one may not thus get derailed as
one shoots forward to reach the temple of success, is the
665

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

third great factor that is to be kept in mind and lived fully,
in order that success in life be assured.
The terms 'Yoga' and 'Kshema' defined as "the power to
gain (Yoga), and the power to guard (Kshema)"
respectively, by Shankara in his commentary, are quite
applicable in the context of our discussion. In life, all
conflict and contests, all struggles and sorrows, whatever
be the form in which they may appear, are always
different from individual to individual, from place to
place, and from time to time, and all of them distinctly fall
into two groups, as (a) the struggles to gain, and (b) the
efforts to guard what might have been gained. These two
tensions tear into bits the joy and tranquillity of life. He
who is without these two preoccupations is the luckiest, in
the sense that he has gained all that is to be gained; and
when these two factors are totally blotted out from one's
life, one is dead to the world of sorrows --- and one
awakens to the world of joy imperishable.
It is promised here by the Lord that to the one who is
capable of maintaining the three factors described above,
and pursuing them diligently, there need be NO
ANXIETY TO GAIN, NOR WORRY TO GUARD, because
these two responsibilities will be voluntarily undertaken
by the 'Lord Himself.' Here the term Lord may be
understood as the "Law" behind the world-of-plurality
and all the happening therein. When water is let out from
a height for purposes of irrigating the lower planes, we
have only to allow it to flow in the right direction, to reach
666

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the required area --- and nature itself will carry it down,
for, it is the 'law of nature' that water always flows from a
higher to a lower level. Similarly here, to one who is
working, fulfilling the three great laws pertaining to the
physical, mental and intellectual disciplines, success
SHALL dog the heels of such a careful ruler of
circumstances.
OPENING UP A NEW SECTION, TO DISCUSS THE
MISGUIDED WORSHIPPERS, WHO ADORE AT THE
ALTARS OF THE DEITIES THAT PRESIDE OVER
FINITE, MATERIAL GAINS, THE FOLLOWING IS SAID:
23. Even those devotees, who, endowed with faith worship other
gods, worship Me alone, O son of Kunti, (but) by the wrong
method.
All the people in the world do not worship at the same
altar. Not only is this physically impossible, but it is
psychologically absurd, since tastes differ from person to
person.
The devotees, during their respective worship at the
different altars, adore the same Vitality that is the
Substratum for the created world of change. Even when
they worship different deities, if their devotion is
sufficiently reinforced with perfect faith, they are invoking
nothing but the one Eternal Truth expressed through the
form of their adoration. When once we accept the Infinite
667

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Reality as "One-without-a-second," remaining the same in
the past, present, and future, it is evident that the Self, as
Consciousness --- that expresses through the equipments
of all Saints and Sages, Prophets and Incarnations of the
past --- is one and the same.
Toleration is the very breath of the Hindu creed, and we
have already discussed earlier, how non-dualists,
accepting the Absolute as Infinite, cannot but be tolerant.
Intolerance is the creed of those who accept a single
Prophet as God. Even among Hindus, all these who
worship as members of a particular creed or sect, are
generally found to be unrelenting fanatics. Some crude
examples are even noticed where a devotee of one deity
believes that, to utter blasphemies against the deities of
others is adoration of his own beloved Lord! These are
mere perversions, obnoxious and vulgar, which have no
sanction in the Bible of the Hindus or anywhere in the
cultural tradition initiated by
the Rishis.
The large-heartedness and endless love in the heart of
Krishna makes him declare here that "THEY TOO
WORSHIP ME ALONE, EVEN THOUGH BY WRONG
METHODS."
The stanza, viewed as an instruction for the external life in
the work-a-day-world, suggests that, instead of seeking
the infinite profit of the Bliss of Self-hood, those devotees
668

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

who are trying to invoke other limited gains in the
different fields of human activity, are also invoking the
Grace of the Self --- only "BY THE WRONG METHOD."
Even the most sensuous, when he is planning to earn, to
save and to spend so that he may procure, possess and
enjoy the sensuous objects, is invoking the dormant
capacities that lie in the Self in him. Sans Self none will be
able to act either negatively or positively. Even in the case
of suicide, a person is invoking Life, inasmuch as, even in
the act of raising a weapon against himself, he is misusing
the Grace of the manifested Life in him.
In this context the phrase "BY THE WRONG METHOD"
only indicates that ultimately, it leads the seekers to the
wells of dejection and sorrow that lie in the darkness of
the not-Self, instead of leading to the Bliss-of-Perfection
which is the nature of the Self.
WHY DO WE CALL THEIR METHODS AS "AGAINST
WHAT THE LAW ORDAINS"?
24. (For) I alone am the enjoyer in and the Lord of all sacrifices;
but they do not know Me in Essence, and hence they fall (return
to this mortal world) .
In all ritualistic sacrifices, the Self alone is "THE ENJOYER
AND THE LORD." It is the Self, in one form or another,
expressing some special power that goes to form the
669

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

different deities, for the invocation of whom the various
sacrifices are performed by the seekers of their grace. Here
the Lord says "I am the Immutable Reality" that is behind
all the deities that are invoked during every sacrifice with
faith and devotion, be it in a Temple or a Church, in a
Mosque or a Synagogue. But because they invoke "limited
potentials in Me" (Devatas) they do not come to realise
"My Infinite Glory revelling as their Self," and therefore,
jumping from one worship to another, they slip down to
fall into delusory confusions and endless entanglements.
Applying it to life, in all fields of activity wherein men
strive (Yajna), they are invoking some finite profit or the
other (deity), and do not strive to improve spiritually so as
to come to rediscover the Self as their own essential
nature. Treading on the slippery slopes of sensuality, they
fall to the levels of brutal animalism and prove themselves
a disgrace to the dignity and status of man.
Complete happiness and satisfaction, perfect contentment
and peace, lie only in the innermost precincts of the bosom
and not in the extrovert fields of profit and success, glory
and fame. Unmindful of this enduring profit that lies
within themselves, men, bitten by a thousand scorpions of
desire, run amuck --- bringing about chaos and sorrows
not only to themselves but to others walking the same
road. Necessarily, therefore, when a generation of such
deluded people come to live, freely encouraging their own
mental weaknesses, and never caring to pause and
estimate their own actions, the history of that period can
670

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

be written only upon the face of a blasted world with the
very blood of the killed and
the maimed --- diluted with the tears of the bereaved
mothers and widows! Indeed, they return to the sorrows
of the mortals (Chyavanti te).
HOW CAN WE SAY THAT EVEN THOSE WHO ARE
INVOKING THE ETERNAL BY METHODS WHICH THE
LAW DOES NOT ORDAIN, COME TO ENJOY THEIR
CERTAIN FRUITS?... LISTEN:
25. The worshippers of the DEVAS or gods go to the DEVAS;
to the PITRIS or ancestors go the ancestor-worshippers; to the
BHUTAS or the elements go worshippers of the BHUTAS; but
My worshippers come unto Me.
It is the law-of-life that as you think so you become. The
thoughts entertained at a given moment get crystallised to
form a blue-print for the individual's character formation
in days to come. This is a fact, very well realisable by
everyone in his own life. Applying this natural law of
psychology in the field of spiritual self-development, Lord
Krishna says: "VOTARIES OF THE DEVAS GO TO THE
DEVAS," etc. The worshippers of the Devas, ancestors
(Pitris), and the elements (Bhutas), as a result of their
worship and adoration with single-pointed mind for a
sufficiently long time, come to attain the desires of their
constant meditation.
671

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Devas, we have seen, represent the various sense-organs,
through which we experience the world. To indicate the
work done, by the term denoting the instrument with
which the work is executed, is quite common in life. To
axe, to scissor, to knife, to hammer, to steer, to pen, etc.,
are examples wherein the name of the instrument is
employed to indicate the work done with it. Similarly,
here also, the plural noun 'Devas,' may be taken to mean
"the entire field of all physical experiences." Those who
are courting the external world of joys and successes
consistently and with the required amount of devotion,
come to gain that field of demanded experiences.
Accepting the term 'Pitri' as denoting the 'ancestors,'
'votaries of ancestors' would mean 'persons who are
enthusiastically alive to the cultural purity and tradition of
their ancients, and who are striving to live up to those
ideals.' An individual, who is constantly endeavouring to
live up to the ancient cultural tradition of spiritual India,
as a result of his constant self-application, comes to gain
the beauty and the shine of the exquisite life of purity and
perfection.
The ancient Seers of our land did not overlook the fact
that, apart from the spiritual aims, in any society, there
would also be active scientific enquiries and repeated
discoveries that were possible among the folds of Mother
Nature's own garments. The active quest in the field of
"objective-sciences" is a part of man's hunt for knowledge,
and therefore, the "worshippers of the Bhutas," are the
672

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

secular scientists who try to observe, codify and
systematize the observed knowledge of physical nature
and behaviour of things and beings as it is now done
under such classifications as Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
Zoology, Botany, Engineering, Agriculture, Politics,
Sociology, Geography, History, Geology, and so on --- an
endless array of specialised lines of investigation,
adopted, pursued and accepted by the modern world. A
large portion of the Atharvana Veda gave us the accepted
theories of nature and its behaviour, as finally conceived
of by the Rishis of that time. The psychological theory,
which Krishna is observing here, is applicable to all
branches of human endeavour --- that is, if one were to
pursue diligently even in the secular field, success would
be assured in direct proportion to the amount of selfapplication put forth by the seeker.
Thus, if consistency of meditation upon the Devas yields
the Devas; if constant meditation upon the "ancestors"
takes us to our ancestral heritage; and if diligent selfapplication in the fields of intellectual enquiry (Bhutas) can
ultimately assure us a positive success in ripping open the
secret vaults of nature --- then, according to the same
principle, we are assured that, "MY VOTARIES COME
UNTO ME." By constant meditation, with a single-pointed
mind, upon the nature of the Self, the meditator can, in the
long run, successfully discover his total identity with the
Self, Eternal and Immutable. In our elementary text-books
on Vedanta, this technique of the ego's constant meditation
on the Self and its ultimate transformation into the Divine
673

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Self, has been indicated by comparing it with the manner
in which a "worm" is transformed into a wasp.
The attempt of the Geeta is to give, not only the Jnana but
also to supply the Vijnana. In order to convince the
student that this elementary technique can take the seeker
to the highest achievements, this stanza is given. Just as
consistent pursuit with all dedicated self-application
brings, in the end, sure success in all fields of activity of
art or science, so too, in the realm of the "within," and
ultimately in the field of spiritual achievement, constant
meditation will definitely pay. The logic behind this
assurance is given here by the Lord.
CAN MERE WORSHIP WITH DEVOTED THOUGHTS,
HOWEVER SINCERE, BRING ABOUT SUCH AN
ABSOLUTE SUCCESS? IS IT NOT NECESSARY THAT
WE SHOULD PURSUE ALL THE ELABORATE RITUALS
THAT THE VEDAS PRESCRIBE, AND OFTEN SEEM TO
INSIST UPON?... LISTEN:
26. Whoever offers Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit,
water, that I accept, offered by the pure-minded with devotion.
There is no religion in the world which does not recognise
and encourage offerings by the devotees. The modern
educated man is rather surprised as to why the Infinite
Lord, in all religions, needs insignificant things like a
spoonful of oil for His lamp, or a candle, or even an edifice
674

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

to house Himself --- be it a church, a mosque, or a temple.
Dreary
intellects,
poisoned
with
their
own
misunderstanding, have even come shamelessly to insist
that these Houses-of-God should be converted into
hospitals and schools, lunatic asylums and maternity
homes!
But I believe that I am talking to a world which has not
reached this nadir of depravity. Not yet. In a society
where there is still the play of healthy hearts and virulent
intellects, there is certainly a need for temples and
worship. And in these Houses-of-God, it is not the
intricacies of their design, elaborateness of the ritual, nor
the splendour of gold and wealth exhibited, nor even the
number of devotees attending, that contribute to their
essential success.
The very language and diction of the stanza clearly sound
the note that the material objects that one might offer are
of no value to the Lord of the Universe, but it is the
devotion and love that prompt the offerings that are
accepted by the Deity. Be it "A LEAF, A FLOWER, A
FRUIT, OR WATER," it is but an insignificant thing that
you offer; be it a golden temple, or be it a dry leaf,
"WHOSOEVER WITH DEVOTION OFFERS," whatever be
the offering, the Lord of Vrindavana assures "THAT I
ACCEPT." For, when lovingly given, it becomes "A
DEVOUT GIFT" and when it is offered by a sincere
"PURE-MINDED" student, the Lord has to accept it.
675

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

There are several carefully coined words in the stanza
which explain the theory of sacrifice insisted upon in all
religions. No doubt, the Absolute requires no offering at
all from the finite mortals to complete Its Perfection, or to
maintain Its Infinite Glory. The limited individuals try to
offer at the Altar of their Lord something that they
have MISAPPROPRIATED from the Lord's own garden,
the world. In a public park, a lover often pinches a flower
from the nearby bush and offers it to his beloved.
Similarly, a devotee steals something from the Lord's own
plucks, and offers the same unto Him. In fact, when thus
we analyse carefully, we know the hollowness of the
vanity of offering something unto the Lord.
And yet, this is insisted upon as an important ritual in all
forms of worship. In offering a flower, or a fruit unto the
Lord, if the devotee feels that he is making a sacrifice of
the very thing that he offers, he is misusing the very act.
The flower, here, serves only the purpose of a spoon in
conveying something unto the Lord. While taking soup,
one, no doubt, lifts the spoon many times to the mouth
but at the end of the dinner the spoon remains the same as
before, having finished its work. The flowers and fruits in
the garden or in the temple, remain the same, but when
the devotee gathers and carries them to the Altar, and
offers them, they become the conveyors of his love and
dedication unto the Lord of his heart.

676

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This idea has been brought out in this stanza, when the
Lord says: "THAT I ACCEPT... THE DEVOUT GIFT OF
THE PURE-MINDED."
Therefore, on the whole, it is clear that an offering can be
efficient, only when it is accompanied by the two required
conditions; (a) "offered with devotion" and (b) "by the
pure-minded." To the extent these features are absent, all
offerings are mere economic waste and superstitionbreeding false-beliefs. If properly done, it can serve as a
good vehicle to tread the spiritual path of selfdevelopment.
THEREFORE:
27. Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in
sacrifice, whatever you give in charity, whatever you practise as
austerity, O Kaunteya, do it as an offering to Me.
Through all activities of life one can constantly live in the
spirit of "devout offering" unto the Supreme. Throughout
the Geeta it has been, time without number, insisted upon
that the mental attitude is of supreme importance, rather
than the mere physical act. And, this is a fact which
ordinarily the seekers forget.
All acts of perception and our reactions to the perceived,
be they on the physical, mental, or intellectual levels,
make them all a "DEVOUT OFFERING UNTO HIM." In
677

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

fact, this is not an unnecessary make-belief or a mere
fancied exaggeration. Nor is it in any way, very difficult
for an individual to practise. The one Self revels
everywhere: in the teacher, in the devotee and in the Lord.
In all our life's transactions we behave, act and deal with
other names and forms, and all of them, we know, require
the Existence of the Self to uphold them. To remember the
Self during all transactions of life is to remember the
Substratum. In a cloth shop where there are cotton clothes
of different colours and sizes, textures and prices, the
shop-keeper is advised always to remember that he is
dealing with cotton clothings. This cannot be very difficult
for any sane shop-keeper, and it will be safe and profitable
for him to remember this fact, for it would prevent him
from entertaining misconceptions and thereby either
charging the exorbitant prices of woollens, or selling off
his goods as cheap as gunny bags! If a goldsmith is asked
to remember that he is working on gold, it is only for his
own benefit.
Just as cotton is in all cloth, gold in all ornaments, the Self
is the Essential-stuff in all names and forms. A devotee
who can constantly remember the Divine in all his
contacts in life, is alone the one who can give to life the
respect and reverence that it deserves. It is a law in life
that as you give unto life, so shall life give unto you. Smile
at life and life smiles; frown at life and life frowns at you;
approach life with due reverence and respect, born out of
the cognition of the Divine essence in it, and life shall
respect and revere you.
678

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When all activities are performed in the Spirit-of-Offering,
not only our love for the Supreme increases but also our
entire life becomes sanctified with a noble purpose and a
divine aim. In the context of the Geeta's insistence on
single-pointedness of mind, and devoted contemplation of
the Self, so far described, we can easily see how this stanza
provides us again with an efficient and secret method by
which the seekers are unconsciously made to remember
the Supreme constantly --- not in the deep jungles, nor in
the secret caves, but right in the field of life's contentions.
WHAT WOULD BE THE EFFECT OF SUCH A MANNER
OF LIVING LIFE IN THE PURE SPIRIT OF DEDICATED
OFFERING?... LISTEN:
28. Thus shall you be freed from the bonds-of-actions yielding
good and evil "fruits" ; with the mind steadfast in the YOGA of
renunciation, and liberated, you shall come unto Me.
This spiritual goal remaining the same, the "Divine-paths"
are different; and when the different paths are explained,
though they look very different from each other, they all
have the same scientific basis that justifies each one of
them. At many places in the Geeta, this fundamental basis
has been directly brought to the recognition of the
students, while in a few instances it is slightly veiled; yet,
careful students can always come to recognise it. In this
section, we are in the midst of a discussion on how, by
living life in a 'spirit-of-offering,' the individual can come
679

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

to claim and finally enjoy the Highest Perfection which
meditation promises and the Yajna-spirit guarantees.
When actions are undertaken without ego, the reactions of
those actions (Vasanas), whether good or bad, cannot reach
us, since he who is to suffer or enjoy the reactions would
be "out-of-station" from the given bosom. The ego acts,
and it is the ego that receives the reactions.
Hence Bhagawan says, "YOU SHALL BE FREE FROM
THE BONDAGES OF ACTIONS, GOOD OR EVIL." Since
the reactions (Vasanas) arising from fresh actions do not
add their impressions on to the mind, and since the
existing impressions (Vasanas) get wiped out during the
mind's activities in the world outside, slowly and steadily,
the mind gets almost a total purgation of all its existing
Vasanas. In short the mind becomes more and more
PURIFIED --- the term being used in its scriptural sense. A
purified mind has more concentration and singlepointedness.
The next stage of evolution is that such a purified mind,
discovering in itself more and more discrimination, learns
to live a life of Samnyasa and Yoga. Both these terms are to
be understood in the Geeta-way. Earlier these terms have
been very elaborately discussed. Sannyasa or renunciation,
is not the physical rejection of the world, but in the
language of the Geeta, Samnyasa is the renunciation of: (a)
all ego-centric activities and (b) all anxieties or cravings
for the fruits of actions. These two effects would be
680

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

natural in one who is striving diligently in the world, as
an expression of his love for the Lord, only to dedicate, in
the end, all the results unto the Lord as his humble,
simple, 'offering.'
To the one who has come to live the Geeta-Sannyasa and
has developed, by discrimination, a mind full to the brim
with purity, Yoga is natural --- especially so, because all
through the hours of his activity he is constantly
remembering the SELF, the INFINITE.
Naturally, such a seeker discovers that his earlier
identifications with the false and the consequent sense of
limitations and pains of mortality fall off from him and he
discovers for himself his Divine Nature: "BY PRACTICE
AND RENUNCIATION YOU SHALL FIND RELEASE
AND COME TO ME."
THE SEEKER IS PROMISED THAT HE WILL GO TO
THE SUPREME. WHAT THEN IS THE NATURE OF THE
SELF?
29. The same am I to all beings, to Me there is none hateful nor
dear; but those who worship Me with devotion, are in Me and I
am also in them.
The Self is ONE in all beings; the same Conscious
Principle illumines the emotions and thoughts in all
bosoms of all living creatures. "I AM IN ALL BEINGS."
681

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The same Sun illumines all objects of the world and its
rays get reflected on all surfaces --- whether the dull,
rough surface of a rock, or the bright polished facet of a
jewel.
TO ME THERE IS NONE HATEFUL NOR DEAR --- If the
same Self revels in Krishna and Buddha, Shankara and
Christ, in a lunatic and in a murderer, in the good and in
the bad, why is it that some are able to recognise the
divine status of the Self and others live like worms? In the
emotional literature, expounding the Bhakti-cult, there is
always the sentimental explanation that it is because,
under the Lord's direct grace, some come to manifest a
greater amount of divinity. This theory may be
satisfactory to the few, who do not bring their reasoning
capacity into the field of religious discussion. But to the
intelligent ones, this explanation should appear absurd,
inasmuch as the Supreme would have to be considered as
exhibiting partiality to some in the world. To negate this
imperfect explanation, and to express the purely scientific
theory, krishna declares here that the Self is the same
everywhere, always, and that to the Self there is no
distinction between the good and the bad; the Self
entertains neither a particular love nor any special hatred
for any of the living beings.
This should not be understood as meaning that the Self is
an impotent factor, inert, and emotionless, with no
capacity in Itself to bless or to help. Employing the
analogy of the sunlight which we have already examined,
682

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the idea implied here can be better understood. Even
though the same sunlight reflects upon the different types
of objects in the world, it is true that the quality and the
nature of the reflecting surface will determine the clarity
and the intensity of the light reflected. On a dull piece of
rough stone there will be the least amount of light
reflected, while in a bright clean and polished mirror there
will be, perhaps, the maximum reflection.
Because of this difference, sunlight cannot be accused of
having special love for the mirror, or a disgust for the
rough stone. Applying the analogy to the subjective life, it
becomes clear that if the spiritual strength and beauty get
reflected more from the golden-hearts of the rare few and
not at all from the iron-hearts of the many, it is not
because the Self entertains in Itself any preference for, or
any prejudice against, anyone, but it is only a natural
phenomenon, happening in perfect obedience to the law
of the universe.
Though in the first line there is a total negation of any
relationship whatsoever between the Self and the not-Self,
in the following line, there is a striking idea expressed,
which as it were smothers the readers with its vivid
contradiction. "BUT THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME WITH
DEVOTION ARE IN ME, AND I TOO AM IN THEM."
Even though the Self has neither any favour for, nor any
prejudice against the not-Self, to the extent the not-Self
"WORSHIP ME WITH DEVOTION" they are "IN ME
AND I TOO AM IN THEM." We can say that the ghost is
683

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in the post and the post is in the ghost, meaning thereby
the non-dual nature of the essence and the superimpositions upon It. Those who worship the Self with
devotion come to rediscover that the worshippers
themselves are none other than the Self that is worshipped
by them. Even while recognising the GHOST the deluded
one is looking at the POST only; for the POST is the
permanent "reality" upon which the projection of the
"non-real" GHOST has been made by the deluded
observer.
THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME WITH DEVOTION --- This
phrase can be initially understood as a mere ritualistic
injunction, and it calls for a closer and deeper study to
realise its spiritual implications. Worship is a technique by
which, in essence, the entire "thought-forces" in the
worshipper are mobilised and turned to flow towards a
diviner point-of-contemplation, ever seeking a total
identity with the Truth so meditated upon. When this is
done in a spirit of devotion or love, the worshipper comes
to realise his total oneness with his object-of-worship.
With this implied meaning well in mind, when we re-read
the stanza, what Krishna means in this philosophical
statement becomes amply clear. Even though Truth has
neither a preference for, nor a prejudice against anyone,
some noble souls come to experience, and later on exhibit
in themselves the effulgence of divinity, because, as the
Lord says, they, through their devoted worship, have
sought and discovered their oneness with the Divine
684

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Principle, the Self. Theirs becomes the elegance of the
Divine.
A mind, which is pre-occupied with its own ego-centric
attachments with the not-Self, cannot come to live the
Bliss-of-Perfection, while, the same mind, when it has
detached itself from its extrovert preoccupations, becomes
a ready instrument to seek and to discover its true identity
with the Self. The condition of the mind declares whether
the individual is confused or clear, bound or redeemed. A
mind that is turned outward, rushing out and panting to
gain its satisfactions in the world-of-objects, gets bound to
the finite, and comes to groan with pain and
disappointment; while the same mind when turned
inward, away from the objects, seeking the Self, comes to
rediscover its own identity with the Spiritual Centre.
In winter, inside a room one suffers from cold, while
outside there is plenty of sunshine. He who walks out of
the room into the sunshine comes to be blessed by the
warmth of the Sun while they who bury themselves in
their rooms suffer the discomforts of the cold. The Sun has
neither a preference for those who are basking under its
rays, nor has it any prejudice against those who do not
come out under its shine and warmth. In the language of
this stanza, we may call those who have walked out to the
sunny courtyard as "blessed" by the Sun, while those who
stay indoors as "not blessed" by that luminous energiser in
the sky?
685

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Never does the Geeta, at any point, encourage man's
surrender to circumstances, or to his own debilities and
incompetencies. As a Scripture of activity and optimistic
endeavour, the Geeta unmistakably emphasizes the
ultimate supremacy of man over his weaknesses and even
over his circumstances.
IS THIS PATH OF SELF-DISCOVERY AVAILABLE
ONLY FOR THE GOOD?... LISTEN:
30. Even if the most sinful worships Me, with devotion to none
else, (or with single-pointedness) , he too should indeed be
regarded as 'righteous, ' for he has rightly resolved.
The practice of devotion, understood in the special
meaning in which it is used in the Geeta, is glorified here
by indicating its effects upon each individual practitioner.
In the Geeta, Bhakti is selfless contemplation with a singlepointed mind upon the non-dual Brahman considered as
nothing other than the very Essence in the devotee. When
this Bhakti is practised for a sufficiently long time, with the
required intensity and sincerity, the evolution in the
individual is mapped out here showing the various stages
in its efflorescence.
Ordinarily, there is a vague belief that a vicious sinner or a
desperate criminal is an outcaste, who can never dare to
enter the courtyard of heaven. This condemnation of the
immoral sinner is an unhappy mis-reading of the spirit of
686

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Vedic literature. THE VEDAS CONDEMN THE SIN, NOT
THE SINNER. The evil ways of the sinner are but
expressions of the evil thoughts in his mind, and so, if the
texture of the thoughts flowing in his mind could be
changed, the texture of his behaviour would also be
transformed. He who has come to keep consistently in his
mind, thoughts of the Lord, accomplishes, in the warmth
of his growing devotion, so total a rehabilitation of the
mental life that he cannot thereafter carry on his career in
sin.
EVEN IF A WICKED PERSON WORSHIPS ME --- Not
only does the Geeta throw its gates open to the sinners,
but the Singer of the Divine Song also seems to have great
missionary zeal to redeem all sinners, and bless them.
Even those who are given to evil ways are not debarred
from entering the field of spirituality because of their
undivine actions and the impurity of their lives. The only
insistence is that the worship of the Self must be
performed by the devotee with "undivided devotion."
Here the term 'undivided' (Ananya) can be applied both to
the 'mind of the meditator' and to the 'goal meditated
upon.' On the whole, the phrase implies that devotion can
pay its promised dividend only when the devotee, with a
single-pointed mind, contemplates upon a goal that is
non-dual and permanent. The non-dual Self is not to be
considered as different from the very Essence in the
devotee himself (Ananya).

687

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

HE SHOULD BE REGARDED AS GOOD --- Even though
he has been, till this day, a man of evil ways, wicked and
cruel, living the life of the senses, uncontrolled and
passionate, even then, from the moment he has taken to
the path of contemplation upon the Supreme, with
devotion, he is to be considered, says Krishna, as
'SAINTLY AND GOOD.' Such usage of words is common
to every language, when we want to emphatically assert a
state or condition to be fulfilled in the immediate future.
In all such cases, we claim it as a state accomplished, even
in the present 'baking the bread,' 'making the tea,' are all
examples when, even while kneading the flour or boiling
the water, we refer to these acts with a term indicating
anticipatory fulfilment. Similarly here, one who has taken
to the "Path Divine" is called, from that very moment, as
"GOOD AND SAINTLY" because he will soon (Acirat)
grow out of himself to thrive and flourish in the vaster
atmosphere of spiritual glory; it is an anticipatory
statement.
Such an individual is to be considered good and divine,
"FOR," as Krishna puts it, "HE HAS RIGHTLY
RESOLVED." In the Life Divine, right resolution is more
important than mere routine. The majority of seekers only
plod on their "paths" --- a melancholy brood, like famished
cattle, treading their way to the meat-market! Such a
melancholy procession can reach nowhere but the
butcher's block where Time hacks them into pieces! He
who steadily walks the path with an iron-heart of
resolution, open-eyed and enthusiastic, cheerful and
688

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

heroic, alone is noted for sure success and therefore, the
Flute-bearer emphatically asserts that the rightly resolved
man of evil ways is to be considered, from the moment of
his noble decision, as one especially marked out to be soon
a successful man-of-Perfection.
HOW DO WE KNOW THAT WHAT YOU ARE
TALKING IS NOT A BLUFF? WHAT EXACTLY IS THE
EFFECT OF SUCH A SINGLE-POINTED DEVOTION?
31. Soon he becomes righteous and attains Eternal Peace, O
Kaunteya, know for certain that My devotee is never destroyed.
The logical thoughts that lie behind the daring assertion of
Krishna are being indicated in this stanza. When a man of
evil ways takes to a life of single-pointed devotion
propelled by his ardent resolve, that man "SOON
BECOMES RIGHTEOUS." The term Dharma was already
explained as "the Law of Being." Just as heat is the specific
quality (Dharma) of fire, without which fire cannot exist,
the Dharma of man is the Divine Atman in his heart,
without which none of his personality layers can ever
come to express themselves. Therefore, the term
'Dharmatma,' in the stanza, is not fully expressed when it is
translated as 'a man of righteousness.'
Single-pointed devotion and self-application develop
concentration, and therefore, enhance the subtlety of
perception of the mind, and such a mind finds its balance
689

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

even in the highest altitudes of meditative flights. "IN
GOOD TIME," meaning, ere long, he gains glimpses of the
Infinite experience and thus, comes to live more and more
as a dynamic saint, wafting the fragrance of divinity
through his motives, thoughts, and actions.
This substantial edifice of peace which strengthens and
fortifies the existence in us, is the tranquillity divine,
which we come to live as our essential being when the
mind stops its mad revelry among its agitations and
excitements. There is no religion in the world which does
not point to this goal, which can be experienced when the
mind is at rest. A still mind is an open window through
which man peeps out to see himself reflected in the mirror
of Truth. The term guaranteeing here that "a true devotee
soon REACHES the Supreme Peace," is to be rightly
understood not as a destination that lies far away from us,
but only as a REDISCOVERY IN OURSELVES OF OUR
OWN REAL NATURE.
The perfection indicated in religion lies only as far away
from us as our waking state is from our dream. It is a
question of rightly adjusting the focus; if a camera is 'out
of focus' the photograph will give only a blurred
representation of fairyland, while the same scene
photographed by the same camera, well-focussed and
adjusted, gives us the photograph in all its gorgeous
beauty, and wealth of detail. A mind and intellect, maladjusted and incessantly getting shunted among the everrising waves of desires and passions, are not the right
690

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

instruments to cognise and discover the Truth that lies
within itself.
The second line of the stanza brings out the incomparable
missionary in Krishna, who bursts out into an assertion, in
his own rising fire and enthusiasm. After declaring the
truth that even a man of dire evil ways can start his
pilgrimage on the very day he takes unto himself the firm
resolve to re-educate his mind, and after indicating the
stages of his growth, till he reaches the Supreme Peace,
Krishna, as it were, pats Arjuna on the back and declares
"MY DEVOTEE IS NEVER DESTROYED."
Toeing the line of the Rishis, Krishna says that Arjuna
should declare from house-tops the one unchallengeable
truth that the seeker of the nobler values shall know no
failure if his resolve is firm and if he be sincere in his selfapplication. The special phrase, employed here to declare
Krishna's advice to Arjuna, Pratijaneehi, has, in Sanskrit, its
own special powers of assertion, and it can express a sort
of imperative urgency. Those who are students of the
Sanskrit language can easily perceive it; those who are
not, may make a note of the same.
In short, this and the previous stanza together express that
he who has come to entertain constantly, at least in one
corner of his mind, a continuous awareness of the Divine
Principle and allows it to influence the rest of his mental
field, is the one marked out for progress and growth, both
in his life within and in his life without. Just as a blue
691

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

street light adds a blue tinge to the colour of the dresses of
all those who pass under it, irrespective of the actual
colour of their various dresses, so too, in the blaze of
Divine Awareness, even criminal thoughts rising in that
mind would gather the golden hues of godly perfections.
Just as moth-balls kept in a wardrobe protect all the
clothes kept therein and keep away all the worms, so too,
the constant Samarana of the Divine Nature of the Self
protects the human personality from the destructive
worms of its inner negativeness.
FURTHER:
32. For, taking refuge in Me, they also, who O Partha, may be of
a "sinful birth" --- WOMEN, VAISHYAS as well as
SHUDRAS --- even they attain the Supreme Goal.
As an annotation and an explanatory appendix to the
immediately preceding pair of stanzas, it is added that it is
not only those who are placed under wrong influences
and unfavourable external conditions who are redeemed
by the constant remembrance of the Divine. Those who
are victims of congenital maladjustments, both in their
mental make-up and in their intellectual constitution, also
can get their equipments readjusted and tuned up
properly by the same process of constant remembrance of
the Truth Eternal.

692

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

No doubt, there are expressions in the Vedas, in the
Puranas, and in the Smritis, which seemingly fall in line
with the language of this stanza. To condemn women,
traders (Vaishyas) and workers (Shudras) as individuals of
inferior births is equivalent to accepting that religion has
an effective influence ONLY upon a mere handful of
members of our society. This would be a denial of what
Krishna had been hammering upon from the opening
stanza onward. Therefore, we have to understand the true
implications of His words as He uses them here.
Religion is not a technique for developing the physical
body, nor is it an art to be fulfilled through the play of the
physical body. The condition and status of the physical
body have nothing to do with the evolutionary progress
which religion aims at through all its preachings. The
spiritual practices contribute to the integration of the mind
and intellect and to their progressive unfoldment, until, in
their ripeness, they shed themselves, leaving the Spirit
naked in all its divine glory. Thus, these terms, as used in
this stanza, are to be understood as indicating some
special qualities of the human mind-and-intellect,
manifested in varying degrees in different individuals, at
different times.
The "feminine-minds" (Striyah) are those that have a larger
share of deep affections and binding attachments. So too,
there are people, who have a "commercial attitude" in all
their thoughts and actions and who live in their mental
life as traders (Vaishyas), ever calculating the profits that
693

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

would accrue from all their psychological investments.
Such a calculating mind, ever looking to the profits that
could be raised, is not fit for easily evolving through the
"Path-of-Meditation." To surrender all fruits of actions is
the secret of holding the mind still, and of making it live
vitally, the Infinite, that is the content of a single presentmoment. Thus, when the Science of Spirit-development
condemns the traders, it is only a denunciation of the
particular commercial tendency of the mind. Those who
fall under the group of 'traders' PSYCHOLOGICALLY
cannot hope to progress on the Path Divine.
Lastly, mental attitudes of "slumber and slothfulness" are
indicated by the term "Shudra" here.
When we have understood that these terms, familiar in
that age, are borrowed by Krishna to indicate special types
of mind-intellect-equipments, we have understood the
stanza rightly, without pulling down the entire Geeta
from its well-merited pedestal of dignity as a Scripture of
Man.
The verse promises that, through constant remembrance
of the Lord, not are only all men of evil ways redeemed,
but even those who are not able to walk the "Path Divine,"
because of some psychological and intellectual debilities
in them, will be cured and steadily strengthened to walk
the "Path" efficiently, if they too, with single-pointed mind
and sincere devotion, learn to remember continuously,
and meditate daily upon the Divine Self.
694

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

BORN OUT OF THE WOMB OF SIN --- Sin, according to
Vedanta, is a wrong tendency in the mind created out of
the past unhealthy thought and negative living. These
wrong channels of thought (vasanas), irresistibly drive
man to live false values and bring about confusion and
chaos into his life, as well as into the lives of others. It is
these wrong tendencies, ploughed on the mental fields,
that are the sources of the feminine nature of the mind
(Stritvam), or the commercial attitude of the intellect
(Vaishyatwam), or the general dullness and somnolent
morbidity in one's inner life (Shudratwam). A dull-witted
pundita alone will have the audacity to commit the folly of
interpreting this stanza, adhering faithfully to the literal
meaning, conveniently forgetting Sri Krishna's own
definition of Varnashrama Dharma given previously in his
discourses.
In short, when these wrong tendencies are in the mind, the
Rishis have declared, in sheer kindness, that it is useless
for that mind to undertake a study of the Vedas. Therefore,
such minds were debarred from doing so. To attain the
necessary qualification for a successful study of the sacred
lore, the prescription is Sadhana. Of all the spiritual
practices (Sadhana), the most efficient is the constant
remembrance of the Lord with a heart overflowing with
love and devotion (Upasana). It is the Vedantic declaration
that through Upasana the mind gets purified --- purified of
its debilities which are classified and indicated by the
terms, "WOMEN, TRADERS AND WORKERS."
695

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When once these negative qualities have been removed
from a mind, it gains in its powers of achieving
concentration, single-pointedness and balance for its flight
to the very horizons of thought. When once the equipment
is ready and rigged for the pilgrimage, the destination will
soon be reached; and therefore, Krishna promises "EVEN
THEY ATTAIN THE SUPREME GOAL."
KRISHNA GOADS ARJUNA TO WALK THE PATH OF
SELF-REALISATION.
33. How much more (easily) then the holy BRAHMINS, and
devoted Royal saints (attain the goal) . Having reached
(obtained) this impermanent and joyless world, do worship Me
devoutly.
If the above-mentioned mental types are highly
handicapped in the race for the divine, Krishna, by a selfanswering question, very emphatically points out here,
how easy and almost natural Self-realisation and godly
life must be to those who have the mental purity of a
brahmin, or the large heart and the clear head of a Rajarshi.
A king who, having enjoyed intelligently his power and
wealth, in his complete satiation arising out of his
growing inner discrimination, comes to experience the
inward peace of true contemplation upon the Self, is
called a Rajarshi.

696

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

After describing all possible types of "heads-and-hearts"
and after prescribing treatment for all of them to
rediscover their own Divine Nature, the Lord, concluding
the section, makes a general statement in the second line.
"HAVING ATTAINED THIS TRANSIENT AND JOYLESS
WORLD, WORSHIP ME DEVOUTLY." This instruction to
Arjuna is an instruction for all, since, in the Geeta if Lord
Krishna represents the Self, Arjuna represents the
confused man standing impotent against the challenges of
life.
Life is lived in a field always constituted of objects,
instruments, and mental moods. These three are ever in a
state of change. Naturally, the flickering joys that come to
us in life prove to be transient. And the intervals between
any two experiences of joy are only FULL OF PAIN.
In tune with the positive and energising philosophy of
optimism which the Geeta preaches, here Krishna declares
the world to be a mere pit of sorrows, or a ditch of
despair, or a mire of disappointments, or a field of
joylessness (Asukham).
HAVING REACHED THIS WORLD, IMPERMANENT
AND JOYLESS, Krishna advises Arjuna, that he must
occupy himself in the worship of the Self. In this spiritual
activity, Arjuna has been well encouraged by the Lord
with his statements that to a heart that has not the
weakness natural to the lower evolute but has a wealth of
poise and understanding which are the hall-marks of a
697

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

higher evolute (brahmins and Rajarshis), success is easy and
sure. Therefore "WORSHIP ME DEVOUTLY."
HOW THEN AM I TO WORSHIP YOU, MY LORD,
WHEN I AM TO FACE MY ENEMIES AND FIGHT MY
BATTLE?
34. Fix your mind on Me; be devoted to Me, sacrifice to Me, bow
down to Me; having thus united your (whole) Self with Me,
taking me as the Supreme Goal, you shall come to Me.
This stanza is a beautiful summary of the entire chapter
for it throws a flood of light upon many of the other
stanzas. We may say that this stanza especially serves as a
commentary to more than one verse in the chapter (Verses
14 and 27).
In all text-books of Vedanta (Brahma-Vidya), the technique
of self-development and self-perfection through the "Paths
of right-Knowledge and Meditation," has been defined as,
"Contemplation on That, talks on That, mutual discussion
on That --- and thus, to live ever mentally drowned in the
Bliss-concept of the spiritual Reality, is called by the
knowers of It, as the pursuit of Brahman." Keeping this
classical definition in mind, Vyasa steadily delineates his
aesthetic "Path of Devotion" in this stanza. The same idea
has already been brought out earlier in the chapter on
more than one occasion.
698

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

With "THE MIND EVER FILLED WITH ME, MY
DEVOTEE
MAKES
ALL
SACRIFICES,
ALL
SALUTATIONS TO ME," at all times, whatever be the
type of work that engages him. In brief, the evolution of
the mind is the very essence of all spiritual reformation in
life. Neither the conditions in which we are, our
circumstances and habits, nor the available ways of life,
nor our past, nor our present --- none of these is a bar for
evolving spiritually.
Constant awareness, maintained diligently, is the secret of
success.
When thus "YOU TAKE ME AS THE SUPREME GOAL"
Krishna promises Arjuna, "YOU SHALL COME TO ME."
We are what we are because of our thoughts. If the
thoughts are noble and divine, we become noble and
divine.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the ninth
discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF ROYAL
KNOWLEDGE AND ROYAL SECRET
This chapter has been rightly entitled as the chapter
discussing the Royal Knowledge and the Royal Secret.
These two terms have been already discussed at length.
Earlier in the chapter (Verse 2) we find that, since Pure
Consciousness is the Knowledge, in whose light all
699

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

conditioned-knowledges are made possible, this Science,
dealing with the Absolute, has been rightly called as the
Royal-Knowledge. Elsewhere in the Upanishads, it has
been termed as the "Knowledge of all Knowledges"
because, "having known which there is nothing more to be
known," declares Mundakopanishad.
Om Om Om Om Om

700

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 10
Vibhooti Yoga
The Yoga of Divine Manifestation
The Blessed Lord said: 1. Again, O mighty-armed, listen to My
Supreme word; which I, wishing our welfare, will declare to
you, who delight in hearing me.
The trembling man of indecision whom we met in Arjuna
in the first chapter of the Geeta, has by now developed an
almost incomparable inward equipoise. This inward peace
that comes from an intelligent study of the Hindu
philosophy is vividly brought out in the opening stanza of
this chapter when Lord Krishna himself describes his
disciple Arjuna, as one "WHO IS DELIGHTED" with what
he has heard so far.
No teacher can feel sufficiently inspired to continue his
discourses unless his students nourish his enthusiasm
with interested 'listening'. As one understands more and
more the implications of the philosophy of Vedanta, one
cannot but come to feel an inward glow of peace and
satisfaction. The Lord of the Geeta gets encouraged to
expound his philosophy more exhaustively with a revived
appetite. "AGAIN HEAR MY SUPREME WORD, WHICH
I WILL DECLARE, BECAUSE I DESIRE YOUR
WELFARE."
701

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here Arjuna is addressed as "Mighty-armed" which is a
reminder to the Pandava that he should be a hero in his
inner life to carve out of his present, a kingdom of divine
joy, which is his real heritage! It is evident that the Lord's
discourse is not upon any secular subject, but it is upon
the greater possibilities in man, and on how man can
rediscover them in himself; for, it is said that Arjuna
should listen "TO MY SUPREME WORD, WHICH I,
WISHING YOUR (SPIRITUAL) WELFARE (HITAM)
WILL NOW DECLARE."
WHY THE LORD HAS DECIDED TO CONTINUE HIS
DISCOURSES IS NOW EXPLAINED:
2. Neither the hosts of heaven, nor great RISHIS know My
origin; for, in every way, I am the source of all the DEVAS and
the RISHIS.
Whenever we cannot gather knowledge from direct
experience, we gather it from those who are supposed to
know about it. Even this indirect method of self-education
is not available in Brahma-Vidya, because, as the Lord says
"NEITHER THE HOSTS OF HEAVEN NOR THE SEERS
KNOW MY ORIGIN."
Later on (Ibid. X-5) we will have occasion to understand
what actually the Lord means by the term the "great
seers." It is not the Men-of-Wisdom, explained in our
702

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mythology, the Seven great Rishis starting with Bhrigu
and ending with Vasishtha.
The following is a philosophical explanation of the "Seven
Seers."
When the Infinite is seemingly identified with the Totalintellect, or Cosmic-intellect (Mahat), and develops
thereby an ego-centric personality of Its own (Ahamkara),
It projects Itself, for Its own joy-transactions, as a world of
sense objects. These sense objects are called the five
tanmatras. The 'Mahat', the 'Ahamkara' and the five
'tanmatras' together constitute the Seven Rishis personified
in the Puranas under different names. These Seven Rishis
together represent the intellectual and the mental life of
man, the EFFICIENT and MATERIAL causes for all
creation.
Devas do not literally mean the hosts of heaven; the word
Deva rises from its rot, meaning, 'to illumine'. The Devas,
therefore, are the "sense organs" which illumine for us the
world-of-objects for our innumerable experiences.
It is, therefore, clear that the Self, the Pure Consciousness,
is "THE SOURCE OF ALL THE DEVAS AND THE
GREAT RISHIS," meaning that the Conscious Principle is
the substratum for both the physical and mind-intellect
life in each one of us. Even though they are thus
sustaining themselves in Truth, they cannot 'KNOW MY
ORIGIN.'
703

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

So the Consciousness, being the very SUBJECTIVE-Truth
in us, can never become an OBJECT-of-perception for the
sense organs, or an OBJECT-of-feeling for the mind, or an
OBJECT-of-knowing for the intellect.
IS IT THEN TRUE THAT NOBODY CAN COME TO
KNOW AND REALISE THE SELF, WHICH IS THE
ORIGIN FOR OUR PHYSICAL, MENTAL AND
INTELLECTUAL LIFE? TO DISPEL THIS FEAR IT IS
SAID:
3. He who amongst the mortals, knows Me as unborn and
beginningless, as the great Lord of the worlds, is undeluded and
is liberated from all sins.
HE WHO KNOWS ME --- Not merely knowing in an
emotional sweep, or even an intellectual comprehension,
but it is a true and full spiritual apprehension, which
comes to one during moments of one's intimate
identification with the Self. The Self is to be realised as
UNBORN, BEGINNINGLESS, THE GREAT LORD OF
ALL THE WORLDS." These three terms, each pregnant
with suggestions to those who know a little of the ancient
traditions in the Hindu philosophical thought, are
generally meaningless to the uninitiated. The world-ofmatter is the realm of finitude, where, each being, or
thing, or experience, has a beginning and an end, a birth
and a death.
704

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Infinite cannot ever be born, inasmuch as It never
expresses as Itself in any of the finite manifestations. The
ghost is born, and therefore, it must also die; but it cannot
be said either that the post has given birth to the ghost, or
that the
post has come to be born out of the ghost. The post was, is,
and shall ever be. The Self is Eternal, and therefore, It is
birthless; everything else is born in the Self, exists in the
Self, and when all things are totally destroyed, they end in
the Self. The waves are born out of the ocean but the ocean
is birthless. Every wave, every manifestation, has a
beginning,
an existence, and an end. But the essence cannot have a
beginning, and therefore, in this stanza here, the Self is
qualified as 'BEGINNINGLESS.'
THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLDS (Sarva-lokamaheshwarah) --- The term 'loka' is one of the Sanskrit
words which has a vast range of implications which are
ignored generally by the translators who render it as the
'world.' 'Loka' comes from a root meaning 'to experience,'
and therefore, the world should, in its full import, mean 'a
field for experiencing.' In this sense, we make use of the
word 'loka' even in ordinary, everyday usage: 'the
WORLD of the rich,' 'the WORLD of the under-dog,' 'the
WORLD of the poets,' etc. In its ampler meaning, the
Universe, indicated by the word 'loka,' is not only the
physical world experienced by our physical equipments,
705

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

but it also includes the world of feelings and the world of
ideas recognised, reacted upon and experienced by all of
us in our lives.
Thus, my 'loka' is the "field of experiences" that I revel in
at all levels of my body, my mind and my intellect --- and
it is evident that these experiences can never be mine
unless I am constantly aware of them. This Essential
Factor, pure Awareness or Consciousness, without which
I am dead to the world, with which I perceive the world
and live in it actively, should necessarily be the Presiding
Chieftain that rules with His Grace, my 'loka.'
The Self being the same everywhere, the Atman that rules
my world is the Atman that rules the worlds of all
individuals. The entire universe is the sum total of the
worlds of experience of each individual, and evidently,
the 'ruler' that governs the entire Universe must
necessarily be the Absolute Self Itself. The term 'the Lord
of the worlds' is to be rightly understood thus. The Lord is
not a "tyrant over life" or "a Sultan of the skies," or an
"Autocrat who rules over our world." The Self is the Lord
of our experiences, just as the Sun, in the same fashion, is
the Lord of our daytime world.
HE
WHO
KNOWS
ME
AS
BIRTHLESS,
BEGINNINGLESS AND AS THE GREAT LORD OF THE
WORLDS, ends his delusion. In and through the grinning
ghost that frightened me, I gain a glimpse of the wayside
lamp-post, and forthwith, I go beyond my delusion and
706

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

find myself released from every fear. In Hinduism, the
concept of sin is not a frightening picture of some horrid
inevitability. Man is not punished FOR his sins but he is
punished BY his sins. Sin is a self-insulting act arising out
of a misunderstanding in the sinner as to his own identity.
When one wanders away from one's own Real Nature as
the Self, identifies oneself with the happenings of the
world and behaves as a mass of repulsive flesh, or a
bundle of throbbing emotions, or a pack of ideas, one is in
a manner, dishonouring one's Godly dignity and divine
status, the One-without-a-second. Such acts and thoughts
chain a person down to a pursuit of the low pleasures
only, never allowing him to rise above and climb the
higher peaks of real Perfection.
On re-discovering the nature of the Self and gaining
thereby a perfect, and complete identification with the
Self, he can no longer perpetrate any more of his past
'sins.' The 'sins' in us are the carbuncles from which we
suffer the pains of our limitations and the sorrows of our
bondage. The moment we understand and live in the
realisation that the Self is unborn and beginningless, and
that It is not concerned with decaying and perishable
matter, we have gained all that has to be gained, and
known all that has to be known. Such an individual of
True Realisation becomes himself the "Lord-of-theworlds."
HOW IS THE SELF THE LORD OF THE WORLD?
707

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

4. Intellect, wisdom, non-delusion, forgiveness, truth, selfrestraint, calmness, happiness, pain, birth or death, fear and also
fearlessness, . . .
5. Non-injury, equanimity, contentment, austerity, beneficence,
fame, infamy --- all these different kinds of "qualities-of-beings"
arise from Me alone.
Continuing the general idea that the Lord is the
MATERIAL cause as well as the EFFICIENT cause of the
world-of-plurality within and without an individual,
Krishna is enumerating in these two stanzas the various
qualities expressed by the mind-and-intellect of man.
Ordinarily, when we talk of Creation, we are apt to mean
only the world of physical forms. All the said qualities
indicate a larger comprehensiveness of the term 'Creation,'
and clearly indicate that it means also our mental and our
intellectual lives.
Again, men and beings are usually classified under these
qualities, and each individual is bound up with his own
mental qualities. As the mind, so the man. It is to be noted
that here only the POSITIVE qualities are enumerated.
Following the traditional style of Sanskrit commentators,
we can interpret the second conjunction, the indeclinable
'cha,' as denoting the opposite of these qualities also.
However, the Lord is directly mentioning only the
positive qualities inasmuch as, in a man who has these
708

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

noble qualities, his essential divinity will be more
available for perception.
These different types of emotions and thoughts, which
provide for each individual different patterns of life, and
whip him forward to act and live in the external world
accordingly --- all arise from "ME ALONE." Whether the
ghost be pleasantly smiling, or angrily grinning, or
vengefully threatening, its smiles, grins and threats are all
qualities
that have no other substratum than the post. If the Pure
Awareness were not there to illumine all the qualities in
the bosom, they would have no existence for us.
These qualities are almost a complete classification of the
entire world-of-beings and their fields of experiences, and
therefore, as Shankara observes, we can consider these
two stanzas as an exhaustive commentary upon the Self's
status as the Lord of the worlds (Sarva-loka-maheshwarah).
6. The seven great RISHIS, the ancient four and also the
MANUS, possessed of powers like Me, were born of (My) mind;
from them are these creatures in the world (originated and
sustained) .
The idea which was hinted at in the second stanza is being
taken up here to prove how the Seven Seers, the four
Kumaras, and the fourteen Manus, are all born out of the
709

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Lord's own mind, and they together constitute the
MATERIAL and the EFFICIENT causes of the world, since
it is stated here "FROM THEM ARE THESE CREATURES
IN THE WORLD" born.
THE SEVEN RISHIS --- The personified representation of
the Seven Seers, as found in the Puranas, when understood
"subjectively," are nothing but one's intellect, ego and the
five sense stimuli, which, together, constitute the world
experienced by each one of us (X-2).
Subjectively analysed, it is very easy for us to perceive the
implication of this allegory provided by the Seven-Rishis
picture. We know that when thoughts rise in us, they, in
their individual manifestations, are incapable of
disturbing us. At a certain moment, some desire in us gets
concentrated, and, identifying with it, we maintain it in a
steady stream of dynamic thoughts. Thus dynamised, the
initial thought becomes mighty and powerful enough to
destroy our peace and tranquillity, and projecting itself,
creates the perceptions of and our reactions to the world
of the five sense objects. The thought-stream and its
projections together supply us with both the MATERIAL
and the EFFICIENT causes for our own tiny world of joys
and sorrows, victories and failures, yearning and
fulfilments.
THE FOUR ANCIENTS AND THE MANUS --- Sri
Shankaracharya, in his commentary, reads the stanza as
'THE ANCIENTS, AND THE FOUR MANUS,' in the
710

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

context of a subjective analysis, which is recommended
and ably supported by the next line, wherein the Lord
says that all of them are children of "MY MIND."
It is described in the Puranas, the Brahmaji, the Creator, at
the very beginning of Creation, produced out of his own
mind four eternal boys (Kumaras), Sanatkumaara, Sanaka,
Sanatana, and Sanandana. The creator in us is the life in
us functioning through an 'urge-to-create' in any field.
Whenever the creative urge expresses itself immediately
the factors constituting the subtle-body (Antahkarana)
express themselves and function in full vigour. When the
Creator of the whole Universe comes under the 'urge-toexpress,' he has to maintain a constant Sankalpa, which
immediately produces a channel of "constant thoughts"
creating the stuff for the 'inner-instruments.' This 'bundle
of thoughts,' flowing constantly, functions as the mind,
intellect, ego, and chit. These four factors, comprising the
total inner-instrument, are represented by the Eternal
Boys of Wisdom, born out of the mind of the Creator, at
the very beginning of his creative activity.
Thus, in one and the same stanza, the macrocosmic
(Samashti) and the microcosmic (Vyashti) causes of
Creation have been indicated. Macrocosmically, the Totalintellect (Mahat), ego (Ahamkara), and the five rudimentary
sense objects (tanmatras) supply the causes for the
projection of the world and its sustenance, while
microcosmically the 'creative-urge' in us gets fulfilled
711

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

through the intervention and play of our inner equipment
constituted of the intellect, mind, ego and chit.
The Seven Seers and the Four Ancients together indicate,
thus, both the efficient and the material causes of the
macrocosmic and microcosmic worlds created.
WHY
SHOULD
ONE
UNDERSTAND
THESE
IMPLICATIONS
OF
CREATION
FROM
THE
STANDPOINT OF THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE
COSMIC MINDS?... LISTEN:
7. He, who in truth knows these manifold manifestations of My
being (Macrocosm) , and (this) YOGA -power of Mine
(Microcosm) , becomes established in the "tremorless -YOGA "
; there is no doubt about it.
"He, who in reality knows these two, My Vibhuti and My
Yoga," gets established in the realisation of the Supreme.
We find that the terms Vibhuti and Yoga, which appear in
this stanza, are invariably translated as "Manifold
manifestation of beings" (Vibhuti) and "My power" (Yoga).
In effect, although these translations are true, they are not
efficient enough to convey the subtle and the brilliant
connection between the statement and what has been
indicated in the previous stanza. Macrocosmic projection
of a created Universe, through the intervention of the
"Seven Seers," is the Absolute's own Vibhuti, while the
712

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

microcosmic experience of a limited world, through the
intervention of the mind-born "Four Ancient Kumaras," is
the Divine Yoga of the Self in each one of us. Since the Self,
presiding over the destinies of the individual, is Itself the
Absolute that forms the substratum for the entire
Universe, he who realises both the Vibhuti and the Yoga as
divine expressions of the Eternal, realises the Infinite.
That this understanding of the macrocosm and its
influence upon the play-of-life in the field of plurality
should not be merely a professor's book-knowledge, is
indicated here, when Krishna insists that the seeker must
know it "in reality" (Tattwatah). This means that the abovementioned knowledge is to be realised in a subjective
experience, and intuitively lived, as "I am the Self."
"When I play through the 'Seven Seers' I PAINT the
Universe, and when I play through the 'Four Ancients' I
LIVE the tearful life of an individual." It is not then very
difficult for us to feel the appropriateness of the statement
in the last stanza that the Rishis, Ancients and the Manus,
all "WERE BORN OF MIND." When the Self, therefore,
detaches Itself from both the INDIVIDUAL-mind and the
COSMIC-mind, It comes to revel in all Its Absolute glory.
Identifying Itself with the COSMIC-mind It becomes the
Creator (Ishwara) CREATING THE UNIVERSE, and
identifying with the individual-mind It becomes the
limited ego (Jiva), SUFFERING THE LIMITED WORLD.
To know this implication and to live up to this is the
TREMORLESS-Yoga" --- wherein a permanent and steady
713

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

establishment in the experience of the Self is assured. As
at many points earlier, Vyasa is making his Divine
mouthpiece use the sacred word Yoga in a familiar and a
daringly novel context, so that the awe and dread which
had gathered round this blessed term may disappear. The
"TREMORLESS-YOGA" is as novel as the various
definitions of Yoga given earlier in different verses of the
Geeta --- the one, single, irreplaceable Bible-of-revolt in all
Hindu renaissance movements.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE TECHNIQUE BY WHICH WE
CAN GET OURSELVES ESTABLISHED STEADILY AND
PERMANENTLY IN THE UNBROKEN EXPERIENCE OF
THE INFINITE AS OUR OWN REAL NATURE?...
LISTEN:
8. I am the Source of All; from Me everything evolves;
understanding thus, the "wise, " endowed with 'loving
consciousness' worship Me.
The difference between the microcosm and the
macrocosm is the difference in the equipments through
which the same Truth, the Eternal and the All-perfect,
expresses. When life surges through the Cosmic-Mind, It
(Ishwara) comes to project out the entire Universe-ofplurality; and when the same Infinite expresses through
an individual-mind, it (Jiva) projects out the individualworld. In both these manifestations --- the God-principle
(Ishwara) and the individual ego (Jiva) --- the Essence is
714

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

one and the same, just as, for the manifestation of light-inthe-bulb and heat-in-the-heater, the energy is one and the
same, i. e., electricity. In electricity, considered as pure
energy, there is neither light nor heat. In the same way, in
the Pure Self, in its Essential Nature, there is neither the
God nor the ego. He who realises this "IN REALITY," we
are told, will become established in the Supreme
Awareness through the "TREMORLESS-YOGA."
We prepare a ball of mud of the required plasticity from a
sample of mud after kneading it properly with water. The
ball of mud is next put on the potter's wheel and roughly
shaped. In the third stage, the pot is finished, dried and
polished. And in the fourth stage, the pots so made are
baked and painted. The mud can certainly insist that it is
the 'origin and essence' of the pot, and that it is only in the
mud that the four stages of the pot's evolution had taken
place and are never divorced from it. This is true for all
mud-pots at all times; none of them has any existence,
growth, or development, without the mud which is the
sustaining material in all of them. So too, the same
Principle in its different manifestations becomes Ishwara
and Jiva.
An individual, whose intellect is soaked with
discriminative awareness --- of the subtle difference
between the cosmic and the individual --- is alone capable
of turning his mind away from the created world-ofobjects, and towards the one and the same Subjective
Reality, both in the Creator and in himself. The attitude of
715

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

a mind successfully employing itself in this inward quest
is being indicated here by the pregnant term "with loving
consciousness" (Bhaava samanvitah).
Love, or devotion, is measured by the capacity of the lover
to identify himself with the beloved. In short, love is
fulfilled when identification is complete, and when the
devotee is capable of experiencing in himself that he is
none other than the Infinite Self which, functioning
through the Cosmic-mind, plays the part of the Ishwara,
the Creator, and, which, when functioning through an
individual-mind-intellect equipment, behaves as though It
is the Jiva, the limited ego.
What has been asserted courageously in the previous
stanza has been systematically developed here into a
technique by which the above-mentioned experience can
be brought within the intimate personal comprehension of
every student.
9. With their minds wholly resting in Me, with their senses
absorbed in Me, enlightening one another, and ever speaking of
Me, they are satisfied and delighted.
WITH A MIND WHOLLY TURNED TO ME (Mat-chittah)
--- Only with a kind completely integrated into steady
single-pointedness can the seeker meditate efficiently
upon the Supreme. Single-pointedness is lost if the mind
is entertaining more than one idea. To remember
716

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

electricity in all the bulbs, fans and heaters involves no
deliberate effort; it is the very nature of our knowledge
about it. To remember that all mud-pots are made of mud,
we need not strain ourselves. Similarly, once the intellect
is soaked with a convincing realisation that the Essence
behind the God-principle (Ishwara) and the individual ego
(Jiva) is one and the same, whatever feelings may arise in
the mind or whatever thoughts may arise in the intellect,
it is not very difficult for the Truth-seeker to remain
constantly aware of the Conscious Principle behind them
all and this constant "awareness of the Self" is indicated
here by the term 'Mat-chittah.'
WITH THEIR SENSES ABSORBED IN ME (Mat-gatapranah) --- The term Prana is not to be translated merely as
"Vital-air"; it constitutes the five different manifestations
of life available for recognition in any living body. Here,
however, the term Prana is used mainly to indicate the five
sense organs. These organs of perception are the only
peep-windows through which the mind wanders out and
the world-of-objects enters the mind on its return to the
bosom. Vedanta never asks the seekers to retire, or to run
away as fugitives, from the fields of sense objects --- which
can never be possible as long as we are alive. The path of
intellectual pursuit is the path of discrimination, a process
through which we can so regulate and train our thoughts
that, at the impact of any object of the world, it is
immediately reminded of the Eternal Consciousness,
without which the object would not have been illumined
for the mind's experience.
717

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DISCUSSING WITH ONE ANOTHER --- When students
with a common intellectual interest come together and
discuss among themselves their pet subject, they not only
crystallise their knowledge, but often achieve a reassuring
degree of confident knowledge in place of what was till
then some stray information gathered from silent books.
This technique of common discussion has been tirelessly
emphasised in Vedanta in its very definition of BrahmaVidya where it upholds it as one of its most important
limbs of sadhana.
A true seeker is he who maintains in himself a constant
remembrance of the Conscious Principle in him --whatever be the activities of the mind, or of the sense
organs. He maintains this channel of thinking steadily
through mutual discussions on, and a constant seeking of,
the Atman. Such seekers ultimately experience a
scintillating joy lubricating life's wheels as they roll along
their stony path. In the Upanishads the same idea has been
beautifully put by using a similar pair of words, 'sports'
(kreedami) and 'revels' (ramanti). Here, however, the former
word is replaced by an equally efficient term to indicate
the meaning (tushyanti).
Even while walking the path-of-perfection, Lord Krishna
asserts that the seekers on the "path-of-discrimination"
will come to experience and live a sense of
"CONTENTMENT AND DELIGHT." These two provide
the healthy mental attitude, generating the required
inward atmosphere in which spiritual progress can be
718

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

guaranteed. The discontented, ever-mourning seekers,
painting a miserable picture of mental stagnation and
intellectual destitution, are not the blessed ones who will
gain easy entry into the portals of joyless joy and silent
laughter, the Eternal Goal to be realised.
HAVING REACHED THIS STAGE OF PROGRESS IN
THEIR MARCH, FROM WHERE DO THE SEEKERS GET
GUIDANCE AND STRENGTH TO FULFIL THEIR
PILGRIMAGE?... LISTEN:
10. To the ever-steadfast, worshipping Me with love, I give the
"BUDDHI YOGA, " by which they come to Me.
Withdrawal of one's identifications with the perceived
world-of-objects, or the world-of-thoughts, or the worldof-ideas, can be successful only when one has discovered
in oneself some other all-consuming thought to serve as
an efficient substitute, yielding a satisfactory quota of
absorbing happiness. The Bliss-Absolute-Self has enough
captivating charm to engage the human attention entirely,
and therefore, to the extent to which an individual gets
attached to the Truth, to that extent he gains detachment
from the painful embrace of the false. This Vedantic Truth
is indicated, when Lord Krishna, as though in one and the
same breath, states "AND SERVING ME WITH
AFFECTION, INVOKING
ME WITH AFFECTIONATE DEVOTION."
719

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

We have already indicated that love means identification.
To the extent the ego identifies with the Self, to that extent
is one a devotee of the Truth, and when one becomes
steadfast in It, one comes really to invoke (Bhaja) the
divinity that is now dormant in the bosom.
To those individuals, who are steadily contemplating
upon the Self in an atmosphere of love, delight and
contentment, identifying themselves with the Infinite --- to
them the Lord promises, "I give that 'Buddhi yoga' BY
WHICH THEY CAN COME UNTO ME."
This term Buddhi yoga already mentioned earlier (II-39) has
been described as "the right knowledge gained through
meditation upon the Infinite Nature of the Self." In the
context of its use here, we may say that a devotee striving
diligently, as explained above, will be blessed with "AN
INTELLECTUAL
CONTACT
WITH,
OR
OMPREHENSION OF" Reality. No doubt, we do not
mean that the intellect can comprehend the Infinite. We
are merely borrowing a familiar phrase from the realm of
finite experiences. As long as what we have
comprehended intellectually is not contradicted by any
other different comprehension, we are capable of
experiencing what we have comprehended, beyond all
traces of doubt. Similarly, the power of an intuitive
awareness of Reality comes only to such seekers in whom
the maturity of a steady and continued contemplation
upon the Self has come about.
720

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When, through the above process of bringing the mind to
quietude, a meditator has succeeded in arresting the
mind's agitations (Vikshepa), and has consequently lifted
the veiling (Avarana) from his intellect, he comes to the
State of Transcendental Experience (Samadhi), which is the
fulfilment of Buddhi yoga.
THROUGH THIS "BUDDHI YOGA" WHAT EXACTLY
DOES THE LORD PROVIDE FOR THE SEEKER?...
LISTEN:
11. Out of mere compassion for them, I, dwelling within their
hearts, destroy the darkness born of ignorance by the luminous
Lamp-of-Knowledge.
A thing existing in the outside world may sometimes be
veiled from our perception because we need certain
favourable conditions for its full perception. In order to
hear a sound, the sound produced must have the
necessary frequency and the sound waves must also reach
the ear-drum of the listener. Similarly, it is not sufficient
that an object be in front of the eyes to give us the
perception of it; it must be bathed in a beam of light, and
only then can the eyes recognise it.
If I am groping in the darkness for a key that is on my
table, and somebody switches the light on, I can say that
he, with his kindly act, has brought me to the key. It is
absurd to assume that the light has CREATED the key.
721

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Following this analogy, the Self that is already existing in
us, now ducking, as it were, behind conditions not
favourable for its cognition, gets unveiled when these
unfavourable conditions are removed. This negative
atmosphere in our bosom that screens the Self is indicated
here by the term "THE DARKNESS BORN OF
IGNORANCE." Even in the darkness of ignorance,
remember, the Self is abiding; only it is not available for
our intimate subjective experience. When the seekers who
have established themselves in the above-mentioned
"constant awareness of the Supreme," master the Buddhi
yoga, they become fit for the final experience of their real
identity with the Self.
Earlier, we mentioned that Buddhi yoga amounts to the
Samadhi-experience, even though there is yet a thin film of
ego-centric experience-of-Bliss. In this stanza, we have a
description of how, from the Savikalpa, the seeker is
transported, unaware, as though by the intervention of
some Divine Grace, into the consummate Nirvikalpa
experience of the Infinite. In fact, upto the Savikalpa alone
is the realm of conscious self-effort, and even the Buddhi
yoga comes "from above" --- meaning, it comes not as a
result of any deliberate action, but is a spontaneous
"partial revelation" when the density of the mist between
the ego and the Self is thinned. The final phase
experienced when the mist of ignorance is completely
lifted is Self-revelation which comes in Its own Light.

722

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

A radium-dialled watch is kept on the table in a dark
room. In the enveloping darkness I am searching for the
watch. As I remove the various papers and books that
have accumulated on the table, suddenly I come to
recognise, by its own light, the watch so earnestly sought.
The self-effulgent Truth, when hidden behind the fumes
of ignorance, may, for the time being, appear as though
non-existent. When the enveloping ignorance is removed,
Its own Self-effulgence is sufficient to illumine it.
When the "DARKNESS OF IGNORANCE IS DESTROYED
BY THE LUMINOUS LAMP-OF KNOWLEDGE,' the Self
stands revealed in its own glory as THE One-without-asecond, All-pervading, and All-full. This act of Selfrevelation is undertaken and performed by the Lord, the
Self, who ever "ABIDES IN THE HEART OF HIS VERY
DEVOTEES." This kindly act of revealing the Self is
undertaken "in a spirit of compassion" --- in fact, towards
Itself. When I am tired of walking, I sit on the roadside in
my pilgrimage --- out of compassion for myself.
This compassion cannot be directly invoked unless the
seeker pays the price for it. In day-time, when I open the
windows of my room, the sunlight, "out of compassion,"
illumines the room for me; and, we know that the sunlight
has neither the freedom to withdraw this compassion so
long as the windows are open, nor has it the capacity to
show its compassion before the windows are opened. In
short, the sunlight is invoked the moment, the object
which obstructs the sunlight is removed.
723

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Similarly, when a seeker, through the above-mentioned
processes, comes to deserve Buddhi yoga, and practises it
diligently, he succeeds in removing from himself all the
veils of ignorance which are nothing but his own mental
agitations caused by the cloudiness of his intellect. The
self-effulgent Self then spontaneously reveals Itself, in Its
own light. Lightning needs no other light to illumine it
when it passes from one mass of clouds to the
neighbouring clouds.
The instruction-portion for the highest vocation in life,
viz., self-development and Self-realisation, concludes here,
and yet, Arjuna is not satisfied, and is raising his doubt
here requesting the Lord to help him gain a confirmation
through actual experience.
HAVING HEARD THUS BOTH THE VIBHUTI AND
YOGA OF THE LORD, DESCRIBED SO ELABORATELY
IN THE FORE-RUNNING VERSES, ARJUNA ASKS:
Arjuna said: 12. You are the Supreme BRAHMAN, the
Supreme Abode, the Supreme Purifier, Eternal, Divine
PURUSHA, the God of all gods, Unborn, Omnipresent.
13. All the RISHIS have thus declared You, as also the DEVARISHI Narada, so also Asita, Devala and Vyasa; and now the
same You Yourself say to me.

724

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjuna confesses that he had already been taught, through
the Vedic passages, that the great seers of old had
indicated the INFINITE, the ETERNAL, through
suggestive phraseologies, such as "THE SUPREME
BRAHMAN, THE SUPREME ABODE, THE SUPREME
PURIFIER, THE ETERNAL BRAHMAN, THE SELFLUMINOUS PURUSHA, THE FIRST DEVA, THE
BIRTHLESS AND THE ALL-PERVADING." In all these
cases he had heard them only as attributes of the Truth. So
when he heard in his own presence, the same phrases
used by Krishna, in the first person singular, he, the son of
Kunti, feels lost, not knowing how to comprehend that
Krishna, his charioteer, is the Source of the Whole
Universe!
A practical man-of-the-world as Arjuna was, he needed
more data, and we shall discover that in order to satisfy
this demand, Krishna supplies enough information in this
very same chapter. But, instead of satisfying Arjuna, it
only sharpens his curiosity and compels him to demand
from Krishna an experimental demonstration, which also
is provided by Krishna in the following chapter (Chapter
XI).
The ancient seers mentioned here, "Narada, Asita, Devala,
and Vyasa," cannot be very familiar to the students of the
Upanishads. Vyasa, perhaps, deliberately quotes these
Rishis mentioned in his Puranas.

725

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjuna acknowledged and recognised these phrases,
indicating the attributes of the Lord, only as empty and
purposeless words, though they had come from accepted
great teachers. His actual surprise was clearly expressed in
his words "SO ALSO YOU YOURSELF REPEAT TO ME."
Here the occasion for Arjuna's staggering confusion was,
how his own contemporary, Lord Krishna --- a living
creature standing right in front of him, whom he knew all
these years, and was even related to --- could Himself be
the Infinite, the Supreme, the Birthless, and the Allpervading.
Arjuna looks at Krishna with his physical eyes and he sees
only Krishna's physical structure. Krishna has been
declaring Himself as the pure Self throughout the Geeta
and not as a living member of the society. "Sri Krishna
Paramatman" is the teacher in the Geeta and not the son of
Vasudeva, or the lover of the gopis. Arjuna could not
comprehend 'Krishna-the-Spirit,' in his pre-occupation
with 'Krishna-the-friend,' 'Krishna-the-lover,' 'Krishna-thedependable man of intellect and diplomacy.' Hence the
Pandava prince's wonderment and confusion.
THE FOLLOWING IS GIVEN TO BRING OUT CLEARLY
THE ATTITUDE OF THE SEEKER IN ARJUNA WHEN
HE ASKS THIS QUESTION:

726

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

14. I believe all this that You say to me as true, O Keshava;
verily, O Blessed Lord, neither the DEVAS nor the DANAVAS
know Your manifestation (identity) .
Here Arjuna exposes himself and expresses his unfaltering
faith in his teacher and confesses "I REGARD ALL THAT
YOU SAY TO ME AS TRUTH." 'Keshava' is "one who
removes all sorrows of those who have surrendered to
him." Even though he accepts as truth all that Krishna
says, he cannot comprehend the significance of the Lord's
declarations. In short, Arjuna admits here that his heart is
satisfied and is overflowing with faith and belief but his
intellect is starved and thirsty.
The thirst-to-know, under which the famished personality
of Arjuna groans, is echoed in the second half of the
second line, when he admits that "NEITHER THE DEVAS
NOR THE DANAVAS KNOW YOUR PERSONALITY."
The 'Danavas' are the sons of Danu, and frequently
challenge the heaven, obstruct the sacrifices, and lead
generally in undivine life. 'Devas' are highly sensitive
denizens of the heaven who are described in the Puranas
as persons who have subtler perceptions, stronger
emotions and mightier intellectual comprehensions than
the mortals have.
Subjectively, 'Devas' stand for the nobler and the higher
comprehensions in us, and the 'Danavas' for the hosts of
negative urges. Arjuna, the son of Kunti, is expressing his
despair that the IDENTITY of the Self can be fixed up
727

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

neither by the subtlest and the noblest of our perceptions,
nor can we apprehend this Self through our 'Danava'-like
challenge to possess, to acquire, to investigate and to
know. Neither the good in us can embrace the Truth, nor
can the bad in us challenge and bring up the Truth as an
opposing force right in front of us. There are only two
methods of meeting another being or thing; either as a
friend or as a foe, either as something that we like or as
something that we abhor. In neither way can we come to
apprehend the individuality, the total personality (Vyakti)
of the Self --- It being the subject, both in Its expression as
an individual (Yoga) and in Its expansion as the cosmic
(Vibhuti).
IF NONE CAN KNOW THE TRUTH, WHY IS ARJUNA
ASKING KRISHNA TO EXPLAIN? WHAT EXACTLY IS
THE SPECIAL QUALITY THAT ENABLES HIM TO
EXPLAIN THAT WHICH NONE ELSE CAN EVEN
KNOW?
15. Verily, You Yourself know Yourself by Yourself, O
PURUSHOTTAMA (Supreme PURUSHA) , O Source of
beings, O Lord of beings, O God of gods, O Ruler of the world.
This stanza indicates how Krishna is capable of explaining
the Supreme which is not known by the denizens of the
heaven or the hoards of the other kingdom. The Self is, of
course, not known as an 'object' through the intervention
of our instruments of knowing, nor can It be apprehended
728

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

as the 'subject' --- either through the best, or the worst in
us. But, at the same time, the Self being Awareness, It in
Itself is Knowledge --- and to 'know' Knowledge, no other
knowledge is needed. Therefore, it is said by Arjuna "YOU
YOURSELF KNOW YOURSELF BY YOURSELF."
In the Sankhyan philosophy, the Spark-of-Life in each
individual is called the Purusha, in Whose presence, the
matter-envelopments constituting Prakriti, become
vitalised. Here Krishna is addressed as 'Purushottama'
meaning "the Self of all selves, the One-without-a-second."
In the Geeta, the term Purushottama is sometimes used as
the 'most glorious of men' and sometimes in the purely
technical usage as the "Supreme Self."
Lord Krishna is now being recognised and glorified by
Arjuna as the Pure Brahman, when he addresses Him as
"THE SOURCE OF BEINGS, THE LORD OF BEINGS,
THE DEVA OF DEVAS, AND THE RULER OF THE
WORLD." The essential stuff in any object is the ruler and
maintainer of its qualities. The quality of gold rules over
all the qualities of various gold ornaments whatever their
shape, design, polish, etc. More than this is the controlling
and the ruling power of the Consciousness in our lives,
inasmuch as, without Consciousness, we know nothing,
can do nothing. An awareness or knowledge of a thing or
an event is possible only when the mental and intellectual
disturbances caused by it are illumined by the Pure
Consciousness.
729

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

AFTER THE ABOVE INTRODUCTORY WORDS,
EXPRESSING HIS SENSE OF WONDER, REVERENCE,
AND DEVOTION, ARJUNA IS NOW EXPRESSING
DIRECTLY HIS INTELLECTUAL DEMAND TO THE
LORD:
16. You should indeed, without reserve, tell me of Your Divine
glories by which You exist pervading all these worlds.
The Prince is convinced that the Lord is the Essence
without which the multiple world cannot exist. At the
same time, when he looks out into the world through his
familiar instruments of the intellect, mind and body, he
recognises nothing but ideas, feelings and objects; and
they are anything but divine.
When a building is illuminated on a ceremonial occasion,
we see many points of light emanating from the
innumerable coloured bulbs of varying intensity, but,
when we are told that all of them are sustained and fed by
the same electricity, it would be quite natural for the
ignorant to demand that he be shown the electricity in
each of its manifestations! As the Cosmic-man (Ishwara),
the Lord is both Transcendental (Vibhuti), and Immanent
(Yoga), in all names and forms that constitute Samsara.
This can be felt by a heart of faith but cannot be
comprehended by the intellect, even if it be sharp.
Naturally, Arjuna asked Krishna for an exhaustive
discourse upon "YOUR COSMIC-GLORY, VIBHUTI, BY
730

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHICH, FILLING ALL THESE WORLDS, YOU EXIST."
Arjuna, being a man-of-action and supremely practicalminded, wanted to gather sufficient data for his intellect
to ponder over, classify and understand It.
IS IT MERELY INTELLECTUAL CURIOSITY IN ARJUNA
THAT MADE HIM ASK THIS QUESTION?... LISTEN:
17. How shall I, ever-meditating, know You, O YOGIN? In
what aspects or things, O Blessed Lord, are You to be thought of
by me?
HOW AM I TO MEDITATE UPON THEE, SO THAT I
MAY COME TO KNOW THEE? --- The goal of a seeker is
to KNOW the Truth in his own personal experience, while
he is in an intimate identification with It. The Geeta was
advocating, so far, not a life of retirement, for purposes of
quiet meditation, in solitary caves, on the banks of some
river, all alone! Krishna's call to man was a call to duty,
the call of work, the call of living the God-experience in
and through life. Geeta, the scripture, we should not
forget, was declared in the Mahabharata battle-field at a
moment when the world of that time was facing the
greatest known historical crisis, both secular and sacred.
Arjuna has been completely converted into accepting the
Geeta Religion of Right Action. This is indicated especially
when Arjuna addresses Krishna in this stanza as "O Yogin"
--- the greatest Karma Yogin that ever freely lived in the
731

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

thickest of life, yet, never let himself down from the
Consciousness of the Divine Essence.
Moreover, he makes it very clear why he has requested
Krishna to explain "without reserve," His Cosmic-Stature.
Arjuna asks: "IN WHAT FORMS ARE YOU TO BE
THOUGHT OF BY ME?" Even while living life and
meeting its problems, if one were to remember constantly
the Divine Presence everywhere, one must know exactly
where to see It, among the individual objects of the world,
among the combinations of things and in the community
of beings.
STATING AGAIN PRECISELY WHAT HE WANTS
KRISHNA TO EXPLAIN, ARJUNA MAKES IT CLEAR
THAT EVEN IF THE ANSWERS BE RATHER LENGTHY,
HE WILL NOT FEEL TIRED OF LISTENING TO THEM
AND UNDERSTANDING THEM ALL:
18. Tell me again, in detail, O Janardana, of your YOGA power and Immanent glory; for I do not feel satisfied by hearing
your (life-giving and so) nectar-like speech.
A student of philosophy --- and for that matter, a true
student of any knowledge --- should have, first of all, an
insatiable thirst to understand, to know, and to appreciate.
Without this appetite, no knowledge can be digested by
the student with profit. This is especially so in the
SUBJECTIVE SCIENCE of self-development. For, here, as
732

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

nowhere else, the knowledge gained is not only to be
digested and assimilated, but lived intensively. Therefore,
anxiety to listen (Jijnasa) has been recognised as one of the
noblest qualities, unavoidable for a fit student in Vedanta,
if he is TO BE ASSURED OF ANY PROGRESS on the
Path-of-Knowledge.
Arjuna, the Pandava Prince, had this noble trait to a large
extent, for he confesses, "I AM NEVER SATISFIED WITH
LISTENING TO THE NECTARINE WORDS OF YOUR
DISCOURSES." No doubt, it is true, Satsanga has a
chastening effect upon all intelligent and interested
listeners. This intoxication, vicariously experienced by the
students when a true teacher discourses upon the Truth, is
only a temporary exhilaration, a passing mood of false
peace, which cannot stand in good stead when the student
is left all alone by himself.
And yet, however volatile it may be, it can enchant the
new initiates, and some, like Arjuna, may become
addicted to it. This state of fascination for hearing more
and more spiritual discourses is amply indicated here.
Though this is not the end, this is a good beginning, no
doubt, and those who feel a fulfilment in the study of
philosophy are certainly much more noble than the
thousands who cannot even stand a philosophical
discourse, discussing the Nature of the Divine!!
THE TIRELESS MISSIONARY IN KRISHNA, WITH
MOTHERLY PATIENCE, ANSWERS ARJUNA:
733

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Blessed Lord said: 19. Alas! Now I will declare to you My
Divine glories, immanent, in their prominence; O best of the
Kurus, there is no end to the details of My extent.
The elaborate and exhaustive reply of Krishna, which
forms the bulk of this chapter, explains the exact identity
of the Self in individual beings and things and in the
combination of things and beings. It must be carefully
noted that in the following stanzas, while he explains his
Immanence (Yoga) and Transcendence (Vibhuti), he is very
careful to indicate two factors at one and the same time:
(1) His Supreme importance in individual things, and (2)
the fact that without Him none of the constituent
members of an assemblage, or of a community, will have
any synchronised existence or organised life.
The word "alas" (Hanta) with which the section opens,
expresses the Divine Master's loving sympathy and
anxious consideration for Arjuna's seeming incapacity to
realise in himself THAT which is ever the nearest to him.
The usual translation "O Kurushreshtha" (Hanta
Kurushreshtha) cannot be accepted without the sacrifice of
a volume of significance inherent that exclamation --Hanta meaning "alas."
Even though there is no end to the infinite variety of the
Self's manifestations in plurality --- where all the time It
gets projected out, either through the Total-mind
(Ishwara), or through the individual-mind (Jiva) --- the All734

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

merciful One undertakes the impossible, out of His
infinite kindness for His disciple, Arjuna, who has totally
surrendered unto Him. He admits that THERE IS NO
BOUND TO MY EXTENT," and yet, He undertakes to
explain to Arjuna His All-pervading Power-Divine,
"ONLY THOSE GLORIES THAT ARE MOST
IMPORTANT."
In the physical world also it is true that sunlight gets
reflected from all objects equally, be it a dull stone, or a
mirror; but in the mirror, the reflection is more clear, and
effectively brilliant. Similarly, the Lord promises that He
will indicate through very carefully chosen examples, the
vital spots and instances at which the Divinity manifests
itself the clearest.
BEFORE WE ENTER INTO THIS DISCUSSION, YOU
HAD BETTER LISTEN TO THE FUNDAMENTAL
TRUTH, SAYS THE LORD, AND PROCEEDS:
20. I am the Self, O Gudakesha, seated in the hearts of all beings;
I am the Beginning, the Middle and also the End of all beings.
I AM THE SELF THAT EXISTS IN THE HEART OF ALL
BEINGS --- This is a general statement with which Krishna
opens his entire discourse. A real master of research who
is trained well to be a scientific thinker, starts a discussion
upon his pet subject of study and experience by
summarising his entire talk in a general statement. Later
735

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

on, he will work at the warp and the woof of his
descriptions, and at the logical reasoning for the
elaboration of his theme, and will, of necessity, come back
to the same statement at the conclusion of his talks. Here
also we find, in the last stanza of this chapter, how
Krishna concludes with the same thought, more
powerfully expressed, "I EXIST SUPPORTING THIS
WHOLE BY A PORTION OF MYSELF."
If, in the first half of the verse it is declared that Krishna,
as the Self in all, is the essence in the world of multiplicity,
the same idea is expressed in other words, in the second
line of the verse, "I AM THE BEGINNING, THE MIDDLE,
AND ALSO THE END OF ALL BEINGS." The world of
things and beings is essentially a projection of the mind;
the world outside is only the Infinite, misinterpreted by
the finite mind. Therefore, this idea can be understood
subjectively, as referring to the world-of-thoughts also.
Every thought rises from the Consciousness, and when it
dies away, it merges back to leave behind nothing but
Consciousness. There can be no thought where there is no
Consciousness. Later on also we shall find the same idea
forcefully repeated (X-32) and Krishna never seems to tire
of repeating this great Truth.
THE FOLLOWING ARE THE METHODS OF
MEDITATING UPON THE SELF WHILE LIVING
AMONG THE ENDLESS VARIETIES OF OBJECTS AND
BEINGS THAT CONSTITUTE THE WORLD OF
PERCEPTIONS:
736

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

21. Among the (twelve) ADITYAS I am Vishnu; among
luminaries, the radiant Sun; I am Marichi among the
MARUTS; among asterisms, the moon am I.
OF ADITYAS I AM VISHNU --- In the Vedic tradition,
Adityas, described in some places as five, and in other
places as six, are the children born of Aditi. Later on, the
traditional belief considered twelve Adityas, each
representing one of the twelve months of the year. In the
Vishnu-Purana, however, we read that "Vishnu" is one of
these twelve Adityas, and He is described therein as the
most important amongst the whole lot.
OF THE LUMINARIES I AM THE RADIANT SUN --Modern physics admits that the Sun is the source of all
energy. Naturally, the phrase stands amply self-explained.
The Self is the source of all energy wherever it is seen
manifested.
OF THE WINDS I AM MARICHI --- In Vedic verses,
Maruts are the sons of Rudra and the Rig Veda mentions
Marichi as the chief among them. In Vedic lore, the Maruts
represent the presiding deity of the storms, wind and
breeze --- in short, air-in-motion.
OF THE ASTERISMS I AM THE MOON --- The Sanskrit
term 'Nakshatras', as used in Indian astronomy, indicates
the asterisms strewn on the Moon's path. Conceiving
exclusively thus the route of the Moon in the Universe, the
737

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

line may be interpreted as expressing the Lord's glory,
inasmuch as, among the asterisms the Moon is the
controller, the regulator; and in splendour, the most
wondrous of all of them.
But we could as well accept the world 'Nakshatras,' in its
common understanding, as the endless twinkling little
stars that we see studded in the night-sky. There are
commentators, who go a step further, and consider the
world as
representing all 'lights of the night.' This also is an
acceptable interpretation, which can convey to us a wealth
of suggestions to ponder over and meditate upon. The Self
is as incomparably glorious, soothing and pleasant as the
moon is in the entire 'world-of-lights' that illumines the
night, from the modest hut to the Parliament House.
It is to be remembered that in this series of TWENTYTWO STANZAS, Lord Krishna is trying to supply the
seekers with SEVENTY-FIVE ITEMS of thought for
helping those who are on the Path-of-Knowledge, to
meditate upon and intensify their integration and sharpen
their single-pointedness. These are 75 independent
exercises in meditation.
22. Among the VEDAS, I am the SAMA-VEDA; I am
VASAVA among the gods; among the senses I am the mind;
and I am the intelligence among living beings.
738

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OF ALL THE VEDAS I AM THE SAMA-VEDA --- The
bulk of the Sama-Veda is nothing but the essence of the
Rig-Veda and the latter is considered as the most
important of all the four Vedas. In Chandogya Upanishad,
the Sama-Veda has been beautifully glorified Again, in
Sama-Veda, there is the added joy of music, inasmuch as,
the Samans are to be sung in complicated tunes, the
melody and rhythm of which are evidences revealing a
mighty art that has been exquisitely developed by our
ancients. Through the beauty of the comparison, we may
read the Krishna is (I am) the Infinite Essence tuned to
music, as Rig-Veda Mantras are in the Samans.
OF THE DEVAS I AM VASAVA --- Among the denizens
of heaven, Vasava is King Indra. It is interesting to note
that according to the Hindu concept, there is the highest
standard of living imaginable in heaven, but even among
its denizens there are the "haves" and the "have-nots."
Individuals who perform meritorious acts reach heaven to
enjoy the wealth of goodness so acquired, and therefore,
one who has acquired a larger wealth of merits while
living HERE, should necessarily come to enjoy THERE a
subtler joy and a life of greater satisfaction. Of such lives,
the most powerful and mighty, the most splendid and
luxurious life will necessarily be of Indra. The Self is as
Indra among the gods, ruling over the others, controlling
and directing them and organising their lives so that they
may enjoy the highest standard of living.

739

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OF THE SENSE ORGANS I AM THE MIND --- The above
phrase that the Self is 'INDRA AMONG THE GODS' itself
contains the subjective idea to all those who are well fed
upon the Upanishadic lore, that It is the mind among the
indriyas. The term 'Indra,' in Sanskrit can also be dissolved
as "the King of the sense organs." We have earlier
mentioned that Devas, since the world means 'to illumine,'
are the sense organs, and, among them, naturally, the
mind is the patron and the controller without which the
sense organs will not have their play in any intelligent
field of activity.
Of all things created in the world, the most magnificent
and wondrous item is the mysterious power, called the
"intelligence," which has not yet been brought within the
understanding of modern scientists beyond certain vague
and fanciful theories.
23. And among the RUDRAS I am Shankara; among the
YAKSHAS and RAKSHASAS I am the Lord of wealth
(KUBERA) ; among the VASUS I am PAVAKA (AGNI) ; and
among the mountains I am the MERU.
OF RUDRAS I AM SHANKARA --- The concept of Rudra,
as the deity of destruction, is to be recognised by every
student of life because destruction is a necessary
precedent to every subsequent construction. The flower
must die to yield its place to the fruit. The fruit must
perish for the seeds to come out. The seeds must rot to
740

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

bring forth the seedling. Thus, in every progress there is a
continuous stream of constructive destruction. This is
recognised by the subtlest thinkers that were ever born
among men, the Rishis, and in their full understanding
they fearlessly respected and adored the blessed deity of
creative destruction --- Shankara
I AM THE TREASURER OF WEALTH (KUBERA)
AMONG THE YAKSHAS AND RAKSHASAS --- The
Chancellor of the Exchequer in heaven is described in the
Puranas as Kubera, a monstrous, ugly creature, threefooted, fat and short, with a spreading belly, a small head
and eight protruding teeth. The divine cashier is helped
by Yakshas and Rakshasas --- an equally ugly, materialistic,
heartless brood --- in protecting his treasures. It is
interesting to note how the Indian Rishis were typically
against capitalism and how they cartooned the master-ofwealth in such a grotesque caricature, so ugly that
it cannot bring about even an indulgent smile to our lips.
OF THE VASUS, I AM PAVAKA --- There are eight Vasus
and they are Vedic deities presiding over the seasons. In
Chandogya Upanishad it is described that the MOUTH of
these Vasus is fire; there, the word "mouth" may be
conceived of as the instrument of enjoyment and
experience. Therefore, it means that the Self is the very
source from which we gain all our experiences of all
seasons.
741

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The six seasons which the world outside gives us, and the
two seasons which the mind supplies us with, viz., joy
and sorrow, together constitute the eight seasons
mentioned here. Even the spring-time flowers will shed
tears for us, if, at that time, we are in tragic bereavement,
while even the naked trees of the autumn season will be
quivering with joy for us, if, in that season, we have the
joy of success, full and complete --- thereby the two
internal seasons. All of them are experienced by us only
when we are under the grace of our own Consciousness
within.
OF ALL THE PEAKS I AM MERU --- A mythological
mountain, believed to be the centre of the Universe,
according to ancient Hindu Geography, is Meru. On top of
it, lives the Divine, and below it, lie scattered the Seven
Islands that constitute the world. Meru is conceived as
having an altitude of seven to eight thousand miles and it
is described that from its top, the Ganges flows in all
directions. This statement has made many believe that it
may be the Himalayas --- which is not, of course, very
unsatisfactory. But we would rather believe it to be a
mystical phraseology --- representing some special "field
of influence," having its base in Jambu-dweepa and its
extent rising up to the peak described above, from where
Spiritual Knowledge flows out on all the four sides to
bless all of the islands.
CONTINUING TO INDICATE THE STATUS OF THE
SELF AMONG THE THINGS OF THE KNOWN WORLD:
742

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

24. And among the household priests, O Partha, know Me to be
the chief, BRIHASPATI; among generals, I am SKANDA;
among lakes, I am the ocean.
OF THE HOUSEHOLD PRIESTS KNOW ME THE CHIEF,
BRIHASPATI --- The lord of the planet Jupiter, Brihaspati,
is mentioned in the Rig Veda as Brahmanaspati, which is
self-explanatory of his status, among the hosts of heaven.
He is considered as the spiritual teacher of the celestials.
Similarly, the Lord indicates, "I AM SKANDA' --- the son
of Shiva, the peacock-rider, and the wielder-of-the-spear -- "AMONG THE GENERALS."
OF WATER, I AM THE OCEAN --- In all these examples,
it is quite clear that the Lord is indicating Himself to be
not only transcendent, but also immanent. Especially, the
last analogy of the series in the stanza proves itself to be a
typical example. No doubt, the waters of Ganga seem to
have no relationship with the waters of the ocean.
Yamuna, Godavari, Saraswati, Narmada, Sindhu or
Kaveri, Tigris or Nile, Thames or Amazon --- the water of
the various lakes of the world, of the ponds of the villages,
in all irrigation canals, individually, is independent and
has nothing to do with the ocean that embraces the world.
And yet, it is a fact that but for the waters of the ocean, all
these rivers and water-pools would have long ago dried
up. Similarly, in the sentient and the insentient beings,
and things of the world, though individually they might
look as if they have no direct relationship with the Infinite
743

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Ocean of Truth, the Lord indicates here that, but for It, the
phenomenal world would have ended its existence long
ago.
STILL ELABORATING THE SAME IDEA:
25. Among the great RISHIS I am Bhrigu; among words I am
the one-syllabled "OM" ; among sacrifices I am the sacrifice of
silent repetition (JAPA-YAJNA) ; among immovable things,
the Himalayas.
OF THE GREAT RISHIS I AM BHRIGU --- Bhrigu is the
chief of the Seven Rishis mentioned earlier in this very
chapter (Ibid., Verses 2 and 5). Bhrigu is the one who
recites the Manava Dharmashastra, wherein he is
recognised as Manu's son.
OF WORDS, I AM THE ONE-SYLLABLED "OM" --Words are symbols of sounds to express one's thoughts. A
speaker, with his words, tries to raise in the bosom of his
listeners, a pattern of thought-experiences which the
speaker feels in himself. Thus, the word 'tomato' is the
sound symbol which creates in the mind of all those who
know the 'tomato' the same form-experience. To bless
those who do not react to this word, but stand confused,
the speaker will necessarily try to use a series of words
arranged into sentences, and the sentences will be
properly marshalled to give a full picture of what a
'tomato' is. To the extent the describer can mould the
744

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

form, colour, taste and qualities of the 'tomato' in the
thought-world of the listener, to that extent the listener
also can experience mentally what the speaker is speaking
about. Thus, ordinarily, language is full of such soundsymbols to indicate experiences and to communicate
thoughts.
If ordinary word-symbol indicate only the finite, the Rishis
thought that they must conceive a word-symbol to
indicate the Eternal. Thus, they discovered the onesyllabled word 'OM,' which is the greatest mantra in all the
Vedas and traditionally, upto recent times, this has been, in
the spiritual world, the one sound idol used as a prop
(Alambanam) for all early meditators.
OF SACRIFICES I AM THE JAPA --- This universal
spiritual exercise, Japa, is a technique by which the 'Japist'
tries to maintain a constant stream of the same divine
thoughts in his mind. All other sacrifices --- be they on the
"Path-of-Devotion" or on the "Path-of-Action," or on the
"Path-of-Knowledge" --- are ritualistic, or meditative
attempts, for a given period of time, to restrain the mind
in one channel of deliberate thought. As such, in one form
or the other, "thought repetition" of the same species is the
attempt in all Sadhanas. No doubt, Japa is a path in itself,
having an independent existence of its own; but, at the
same time in one form or the other, it is the core of all the
"paths."

745

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus, Japa Yajna is glorified here, not only because it is the
essential core of all the other Yajnas but also because it
transcends them all as an independent "Path" in itself.
Unbroken remembrance of the Self is the very experience
of Perfection and the moment of perfect intellectual
tranquillity --- Samadhi.
OF THINGS MOTIONLESS, I AM THE HIMALAYAS --The motionless is conceived as the inert, the insentient.
Mud and rocks, trees and plants, birds and animals
intermixed with the splendour of the phenomenal might,
such as whistling storms, tearing thunders, roaring rivers
cascading through silent valleys, still pools of eternal
lakes, faithfully reflecting the blue sky and duplicating
mountain peaks in their love-lorn hearts --- all these
together constitute the picture of all mountains. But, "OF
THEM," the Lord says, "I AM THE HIMALAYAS."
Certainly He gives to the Himalayan ranges a more
glorious and divine status because of their special
significance. Unlike anywhere else in the world, in India,
the Himalayas have the secret peaks where man sat to
rocket his thoughts even beyond the frontiers of his
intellect and did it successfully as was never before done
by any living creature from the beginningless history of
the world.
NOT SATISFIED YET, THE LORD IS VIGOROUSLY
TRYING THROUGH FINER EXAMPLES AND WORDS
TO CONVEY HIS INFINITE GLORY TO THE DATA746

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

MONGERING AND WORLDLY INTELLECT OF HIS
WARRIOR-FRIEND, ARJUNA;
26. Among all trees (I am) the ASHWATTHA -tree; among
Divine RISHIS , Narada ; among GANDHARVAS ,
Chitraratha ; among Perfected ones , the MUNI Kapila .
OF ALL THE TREES I AM THE ASHWATTHA-TREE --Both in its magnitude and life-span, the Ashwattha tree
(Pipal) can be considered as the "all-pervading" and the
"Immortal," inasmuch as it lives generally for centuries.
The Hindu has learnt to worship it, and there is a
sentiment of divinity attached to it. It is also a fact that the
Ashwattha brings up in our mind fresh memories of the
Upanishadic comparison of it with samsara. Later, in the
Geeta itself (XV-I) we have a mention of the peepal tree as
representing the pluralistic phenomenal world that has
shot up to spread itself like mushrooms of false sorrows
over what is dreamy nothingness.
OF THE DEVARISHIS I AM NARADA --- Of the heavenly
Seers, Krishna describes Himself as Narada, a favourite
figure in our legends. In our Puranas, Narada is described
as a great devotee of Hari; he is not only a great Seer
among the celestials, but he often comes down to the
world to play the deliberate fool and ultimately guide the
deluded mortals to the parlour of heaven. Perhaps
Krishna, himself being a great missionary, entertains a
great respect for Narada, because of his missionary zeal
747

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and enthusiasm. Many are the converts whom Narada has
won for heaven as described in our Puranas. A missionary
cannot but feel a comradeship with another working in
the same field and nothing can create a greater tie of
identification than the similarly of aspiration in two
individuals.
'Gandharvas' are the mythological concept of subtle
entities who constitute the celestial choir, who entertain
the denizens of heaven with their art and music. They are
the 'stars' of entertainment in heaven. Among them,
Chitraratha is the most brilliant.
OF THE SIDDHAS, I AM THE MUNI KAPILA --- These
Siddhas are not magic-mongers. The term Siddha in
Sanskrit indicates one who has "achieved the Goal
(Sadhya)" and therefore, it means the "Perfected One."
Among Men-of-realisation, therefore, Krishna says, "I am
Muni Kapila." The term Muni need not bring into our
mind the traditional picture supplied by illiterate painters
of an aged, silver-haired, almost naked fakir, generally
roaming about where others will not dare to enter, eating
a strange diet, a strange creature of the forests, rather than
a decent normal man of the town. Muni is a term in
Sanskrit derived from the word Manana which is the "art
of reflection." The term Muni, therefore, only means a
thinker; "OF THE THINKERS I AM KAPILA."
Kapila, the author of the Sankhya philosophy has been
here particularly singled out for this great status as the
748

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

best among all thinkers, because the Geeta mainly follows
the Sankhyan-philosophical thoughts.
The Lord uses the framework of thoughts in the Sankhya
philosophy to paint His concept of the One Truth,
Absolute and Eternal, and therefore, Kapila, the promoter
of the Sankhyan school of thought, has been given the
special glory of being compared with the Lord Himself.
FEELING THAT HE HAS NOT DELIVERED THE
GOODS YET, THE LORD CONTINUES:
27. Know Me among horses as 'UCCHAHI-SHRAVAS, ' born
of AMRITA; among lordly elephants, the 'AIRAVATA' and
among men, the King.
The Pauranic-story of the churning of the Milky-Ocean by
both the gods and the demons for the purpose of getting
out of it the Nectar is very famous. Two of the products
that came up during the churning process were the
Winged-horse, mighty and powerful, called the Ucchahishravas, and the White-elephant, Airavata. Both of them
were presented to the King of the gods, Indra. Altogether,
it is described that thirteen such tempting objects of might
and glory presented themselves during the churning.

749

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

28. Among weapons, I am the 'thunderbolt' ; among cows I am
'KAMADHUK' ; I am 'KANDARPA' , the cause for offspring;
among serpents I am 'VASUKI. '
OF WEAPONS, I AM THE THUNDERBOLT --- The
weapon called 'Vajra' is an item in the divine artillery
which can never be shattered. The Vedic legend explains
how a great seer, Dadheechi, offered his own rib-bone for
the construction of this secret weapon to annihilate a
demon who was threatening to shatter the peace of the
heavens.
OF COWS I AM KAMADHUK --- This strange animal
called Kamadhuk, from which we can milk all our desires,
whatever they be, is also one of the early by-products that
rose up during the churning of the Milky-Ocean.
OF ALL THE CAUSES OF OFFSPRING, I AM
KANDARPA --- Cupid, the good of love of the Indian
concept, is conceived of as a mischievous boy, chubby and
lively, ever carrying with himself his bow-of-smile, with
five flower-tipped arrows, each meant to smother one
sense-organ!! The suggestion is a biological truth.
Procreation is not merely an animal act of insemination, or
a vegetable-act of cross-pollination, but it is, according to
the Science of Sex (Kama-shastra) in India, a fulfilment of
all passionate urges that express themselves through all
the sense organs. A philosopher is a perfect scientist and
as such he has none of the false shyness, which is
generally expressed by immoral people when they pose
750

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

themselves as sandal-coated puritans. Vedantins and
teachers, when they talk of sex-life, are as much brutally
open as the professors are in a medical college.
Of all the causes of offspring, the Lord declares, "I AM
CUPID," who in himself, as the lord of love, represents, in
the field of sensuality, the total satisfaction of the physical,
mental and intellectual sheaths in man.
OF SNAKES, I AM VASUKI --- The serpent 'Vasuki,' is
described in our mythology as ever living on Shiva's ringfinger, as an adornment. Though small enough to become
a ring on the finger of the Lord, it was the 'Vasuki'
Serpent, who volunteered to serve as a rope in the
churning process of the "milky-ocean." This naturally
reminds one of the Upanishadic declarations, that the Truth
is at once the "minutest of the minute," and "the greatest of
the great." Naturally, it is very apt that the Lord declares
Himself to be "Vasuki among the snakes." The term 'Sarpa'
is to be rightly understood, in contrast with the Nagas,
mentioned in the next stanza. Sarpas are single-hooded;
while Nagas are multi-hooded.
CONTINUING IN THE TUNE, THE SINGER-DIVINE
SINGS OF HIS OWN SONGFUL GLORY:
29. I am 'ANANTA' among NAGAS; I am 'VARUNA'
among water deities; I am 'ARYAMA' among the ancestors;
and I am 'YAMA' among controllers.
751

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OF THE NAGAS I AM ANANTA --- "Nagas" means "the
many-hooded serpents." Of them, the thousand-hooded
Sesha Naga is the one that has been described as forming
the "bed" for Lord Vishnu to recline in His "Yoga-sleep."
Here Krishna only means that, among the many-hooded
serpents, He is the mightiest and the most divine, because
He is the very Substratum upon which Vishnu, the
Sustainer, and Brahmaji, the Creator of the multiple
world, recline and function.
OF THE WATER DEITIES I AM VARUNA --- ' Varuna' is
a Vedic conception of the Spirit governing the waters, the
third of the five great elements. Deifying the elemental
forces in the phenomenal world, was the method of
adoration and worship in the early Vedic period. It was
only later, that we started the Pauranic-tradition of
humanising gods and got into the muddy pool religious
differences, sectarian prejudices, and credal warfare,
between colonies of ignorant folks, gathered round a
Jerusalem Master or a Vrindavana Boy, or a Mecca
Messenger. Varuna is conceived of as a being, half-fish and
half-man, almost something like Arnold's Merman! He is
the Ruler of the Oceans and the Lord of the Waters.
OF THE PITRIS, I AM ARYAMA --- In Hinduism, death is
one of the experiences in life when the subtle-body
chooses to leave permanently its present residence within
a given physical structure. The mind-intellect-equipment,
maintaining a separate ego-centric concept in itself,
752

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

continues its existence and it is commonly called 'departed
soul' or 'ancestor.'
These 'departed souls' live together in a world of their
own, called the "world-of-the manes" (Pitriloka). We have
already discussed the Vedic concept of the six children of
the twelve Adityas, each presiding over a month of the
year. Of these, Aryama is the ruler of the world-of-theancestors.
OF THE CONTROLLERS, I AM YAMA --- "Yama" is the
mythical Lord-of-Death, the Chief Messenger of the
Annihilator. In India, we worship the terrible, the sad, and
the tragic also, because, to us God is the Substratum for
both the good and the bad, for the pleasant and the
unpleasant. We are not satisfied by any theory of
compromise by which we reject, in God, any association
with what we do not like.
Whether we like it or not, the Principle-of-Death is the
governing factor that controls and regulates life, and, at
every moment, prepares a progressive field for creative
developments everywhere. The childhood must die before
youth can express itself. I must leave my high school in
order to enter the college. Step by step, I must die in order
to be born into the next step. Progress in itself is a partial
picture of life; it is only a squint-eyed vision of life's total
dynamism. Every development is preceded by prior
destruction. Annihilation, thus contributing to positive
progress, is called "Death's own creative art."
753

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

No new thing can be created unless correspondingly we
also destroy that which existed before. We arrive at this
assertive but logical conclusion when we sufficiently
digest the observed physical law of the world that "no two
things can ever remain at one and the same period of time
occupying one and the same space." When a painter paints
a flower, he not only pours his colour on to the canvas to
paint his subject, but his creative art is a constant
destruction of the surface coating that was earlier given to
the canvas!
Thus, when life is viewed in its totality, there is as much
importance for the "Principle-of-Death" as for the very
"Principle-of-Creation."
But for Death functioning intelligently at almost the same
speed as the rate of Creation, there would have been an
inordinate flood of things in life; and life itself would have
been choked by its own magnitude and number. If Death
were not there, the great-great-great-grandfather of our
great-great-great-grandfather might still be living, even
now, in our own present two-roomed apartment! Even
when there is a slight rise in population, the entire balance
and political peace in the world get shattered. What will
not happen, if Death were not as sincerely serving us as
the Creator? Indeed, of all the Controllers, Death alone is
the Chief and the analogy given here is irreplaceable and
supremely apt.

754

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IN A SPELL OF PLEASANT ENTHUSIASM THE LORD
CONTINUES:
30. I am 'Prahlada' among DAITYAS, 'Time' among
reckoners, the 'Lord-of-beasts' (Lion) among animals, and
'Vainateya' (Garuda) among birds.
I AM 'PRAHLADA' AMONG THE DAITYAS --- The Story
of 'Prahlada,' very famous among the Hindus, is the story
of a boy-devotee who, with adamantine faith and firm
devotion, challenged his father Hiranyakashipu in defence
of his own faith in Hari, and stood many a trial and
persecution from his father.
AMONG RECKONERS I AM 'TIME' --- The logicians
form among themselves a staunch group of Hindu
philosophers, and they not only support the concept of
pluralism, but also challenge the very existence of the
God-Principle. They have, through their purely
intellectual deductions, arrived at the final conclusion that
Time is THE Eternal Factor, and the individual mind-andintellect are instrumental causes to split It up and see in It
the play of the past, the present, and the future. According
to them, it is this "play of the mind" that bombards Time
and makes It look as though It were finite and
momentary. Perhaps Vyasa had this concept in his mind
when he tried to bring this analogy to express the Infinite
Substratum supporting the finite multiplicity.
755

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

There are some commentators who rather accept this
analogy as a simple-looking direct statement; and,
according to them, Time, which is beginningless and
endless, is the ultimate measure of all things in the relative
field.
AMONG BEASTS, I AM THE LORD OF BEASTS AND,
AMONG BIRDS, I AM THE SON OF VINATA --- The
majesty and grandeur, the dignity and "manliness" of the
lion among animals, make him the Royal Lion. Its flight,
its powers of perception, and the altitudes to which it can
climb, make Garuda --- the King of birds.
31. Among purifiers, I am the 'wind' ; among warriors, I am
'Rama, ' among fishes, I am the 'shark' ; among rivers, I am the
'Ganges. '
OF CLEANSING AGENTS, I AM THE 'WIND' --- No
antiseptic or sanitary equipment is as efficient to clean a
place as the Sun and the wind. If the wind alone is
indicated here it is because of Vyasa's perfect knowledge
that wind can rise only when the Sun is hot. Where there
is constant wind, there the Sun also must be available; in a
cave there can be neither sunlight, nor movement of air.
OF THOSE WHO ARE WIELDERS OF WEAPONS, I AM
'RAMA' --- The hero of Ramayana, Sri Ramachandra was
delineated by Valmiki, the first poet in India to use
metrical compositions and write out a full-fledged Kavya,
756

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

very elaborately, of a "perfect man" in all aspects of his
existence: perfect as a son, as a husband, as a brother, as a
friend, as a fighter, as a teacher, as a ruler, and even as a
father. Such an all-round perfect one --- his perfections
shining out all the more against the background of
seeming imperfections and extremely irritating and
confusing circumstances --- should necessarily be the
noblest hand that ever wielded an honest bow to shoot out
the most effective arrows!
OF THE FISHES I AM THE 'SHARK' AND OF THE
RIVERS I AM JAHNAVI --- The story goes that Saint Jahnu
drank the Ganges dry, and later, for the redemption of
man, let her out to flow through his ears! The concept of
the Ganges, we have indicated earlier, is a symbolism,
freely used by the Hindus, to represent the "spiritual
culture" of India. The wealth of the Rishi-knowledge, as it
reaches a seeker, at the seat of his meditation, at first
makes him swallow and dry it up. "Drinking at the
fountain of Knowledge," "to satiate the thirst for
knowledge," etc., are usual expressions in almost all
languages of the world that have some slavery to the
Mother of all Languages, Sanskrit.
Here the stream of knowledge is described as having
flown out through Jahnu's ears; it is indeed a brilliant
poetic concept to connect the term Shruti (heard), which
means the contents of the Upanishads, comprising what the
Masters declared to the world and what the disciples
"heard" from them. In India, teachers come from time to
757

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

time to reinterpret the Ancient Wisdom in the context of
their own age, only after having gained their own
personal experiences of Vedic Truth-declarations. Without
the stamp of realisation, no teacher worth the name will
dare come into the world to propagate the old Truth in
new language.
Of the many names by which the sacred river Ganges is
known in India, this particular name has been chosen here
in order to emphasize the above-mentioned special
implications.
AMONG FISHES I AM THE 'SHARK' --- the shark is the
most dangerous fish in the ocean. So among fishes,
Bhagawan declares Himself to be the 'shark.'
AND ALSO:
32. Among creations, I am the beginning, the middle and also
the end, O Arjuna; among sciences I am the Science of the Self
and I am the logic in all arguments.
OF CREATIONS, I AM THE BEGINNING, AND THE
END, AND THE MIDDLE TOO --- Here there is an echo
of the general statement with which the Lord started His
discourse earlier in the chapter (X-20), for enumerating
His infinite glories. However, therein He had explained
how He was the Essential Stuff in all individual beings;
758

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and here it is a more universal statement by which He
indicates how He is the Essence in all Creation.
No substance can ever remain divorced from the essential
stuff of which it is made. No gold ornament can be made
without the metal, gold. No wave from the ocean can be
packed separately for the Himalayas. No mud-pot can
exist, divorced from the mud. The MATERIAL-cause is
the unavoidable essence in all the names and forms, and
nothing can ever remain divorced from its own essentialessence. By the above statement, the Lord is indicating
that He, as the Self-in-all, is "the beginning, the end and
the middle too" of all things in the Universe. The names
and forms have arisen from Him, are supported by Him,
and they can only merge back into Him when they are
destroyed.
The science that explains that Knowledge-Principle,
without which no other 'KNOWLEDGE OF THINGS' is
ever possible, and which, playing upon the field-of-things,
accomplishes our knowledge of them, should necessarily
be the Science-of-all-sciences, the best Knowledge. In
sunlight, all objects are illumined. Sunlight reflected upon
the non-luminous objects of the world makes them
perceptible. Naturally, the Sun is the "eye of all eyes," the
source of all perceptions. Similarly, the "Science-ofSpirituality" is explained as the "Science-of-all-sciences."
OF ARGUMENTS I AM 'VAADA' --- The term Pravadatam
used here, should be understood by us, according to
759

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Shankara, as the various forms of arguments. Three types
of approaches are often used in all discussions, in all
walks of life. In Jalpa, the attempt is to smother the
opposition and its arguments by vehement criticism and
bitter rejoinders, spoken with an overbearing arrogance in
assertions. In the case of Vitanda, the champion of
discussion mercilessly criticises the arguments of the
opposition, exposing by means, fair or foul, both the real
and the imaginary fallacies in their line of arguments; the
aim beings to destroy the edifice, built by the other. The
third, Vaada, is the technique of discussion by which the
one arguing is trying to read the letter and the verse as
directly as possible, with the object of coming directly to
truth, without indulging in any hair-splitting arguments.
It is evident, therefore, that both the former techniques
(Jalpa and Vitanda) are only strategies to weaken the
enemies, while the actual thrust into the enemy lines and
the ultimate real conquest is only through Vaada.
FURTHER:
33. Among letters I am the letter 'A' ; among all compounds I
am the dual (co-ordinates) ; I am verily, the inexhaustible, or the
everlasting time; I am the (All-faced) dispenser (of fruits of
actions) having faces in all directions.
OF THE ALPHABET I AM THE LETTER 'A' --- It is very
well-known that, without the help of vowels, words
cannot be pronounced. Of all languages, Sanskrit is
760

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

particularly sweet because of the preponderance of the 'A'
sound in it. In fact, every letter in its combination is to be
pronounced in Sanskrit with the sound of 'A' added to it
to lengthen it to its full sweetness. This, as it were,
lubricates the words, and consequently the language has
no back-firing disturbances of rattling nuisance or
disgusting hoarseness. Because of this smooth run of the
'A' sound in every letter, there is a melody even between
words and a lingering echo between sentences. In fact,
after a long chanting of a Sanskrit text in a hall, there is,
for the sensitive, a perceptible atmosphere of soothening
music in the air that can lull all the agitations of the
human mind.
The sound 'A' is not only the essence in each letter of a
word --- not only does it transcend, or overflow the
sentences and flood the very atmosphere --- but it has
itself the first place among the alphabets in all the
languages. Realising these implications, the Upanishads
declare that the 'A' sound is the essence in all speech.
OF ALL COMPOUND WORDS, I AM THE PAIR --- One
of the Sanskrit forms of compounds is the "pair"
(dwandwa) in which the essential components co-ordinate
with each other in the newly formed compound word.
According to Sridhara, perhaps the only commentator
who tried to give us the why of this analogy, the dwandwamethod of combining words is very important among all
the other types, because of this easy and direct coordination of its components. In the context of the usage
761

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

here, the Self and the non-Self are as though mixed up
together, and they constitute the world-of-perceptions
experienced by us; but, to the discriminate, the component
parts are as distinct as the dissolution of a dwandwa
compound is to an educated man.
I ALONE AM THE INFINITE TIME --- Earlier (X-30) also
there was a mention that "OF RECKONERS I AM TIME."
There the finite time was mentioned, while here, as a
contrast, the Infinite and the Absolute Time is indicated.
In short, both these statements put together mean that the
Self is the Substratum for both the Absolute Concept of
pure-Time, and the finite experiences of each moment. But
for the awareness of each fraction of time, the total
concept of Time is impossible. Here "I am IMMANENT in
each individual unit-of-time, and I am TRANSCENDENT,
to serve as a substratum for the total-Time."
I AM THE SUSTAINER --- Acharya Shankara comments
upon this term and concludes that the Self is the sustainer
of mental impressions, and therefore, of the particular trait
in a given individual which determines how he will react
to the world outside.
FACING ALL QUARTERS AT ONCE --- This term has
been exhaustively described earlier by us (IX-16) where it
was described that the Self is not only "ONE IN ALL, BUT
IS ALSO DIFFERENT FROM ALL, AND, IN EACH, IT
FACES EVERYWHERE." The entire implication of that
stanza is to be read into this simple-looking phrase,
762

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"Facing everywhere" (Vishvato-mukhah). In all perceptions,
whether physical, mental or intellectual, there is the grace
of the Consciousness which is the Self, and therefore, the
phrase is quite self-expressive.
CONTINUING, THE LORD SAYS:
34. And I am all-devouring Death, and the prosperity of those
who are to be prosperous; among the feminine qualities (I am)
fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, firmness and
forgiveness.
I AM THE ALL-CONSUMING DEATH --- Death, the
leveller, brings even the sceptre and the crown to the level
of the begging bowl and the staff. Every existing thing
maintains its separativeness from all others only during its
lifetime, due to its individual relationship with things and
beings other than itself. After death, the wise and the fool,
the good and the bad, the strong and the weak, the ruler
and the ruled --- all come to dust, levelled into a
uniformity that recognises no distinction within itself.
I AM THE SOURCE OF ALL THAT IS TO BE --- The
Supreme is not merely the destroyer of all, reducing them
into a lifeless commonality but, He is, certainly, the source
of all new creations that are to come in the future. To
conceive destruction, without taking into consideration its
unavoidable accompaniment, i. e., the new construction, is
but to insist upon a partial viewpoint. In a total and
763

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

complete vision-of-life, taken as a whole, we find that the
so called destruction is only a transformation, or
modification, of the existing form of an object, or scheme
of things, into something dissimilar and varying.
Destruction leaves no total blank anywhere. When we
view a wave separately, we may say that, after playing for
a moment on the bosom of the ocean, it has destroyed
itself, but if we view it from the standpoint of the ocean,
for each wave which appears to have been destroyed,
there are innumerable new waves that rise up, unnoticed
by our limited powers of observation.
We find that Krishna is gathering these ideas against the
contrast contained in his immediately prior statement,
Altogether, the line stresses that the Infinite playing Itself,
ceaselessly, and in repeated succession, the game of both
destruction and construction, is, in fact, what we call as
the finite-Universe.
FAME,
FORTUNE,
SPEECH,
MEMORY,
INTELLIGENCE, STEAD-FASTNESS, AND PATIENCE,
AM I, OF THE FEMININE QUALITIES --- The Sanskrit
terms conveying these abstract nouns are all feminine in
gender. Maybe the Lord means that if ever we find these
qualities in women, we can perceive a clearer flicker of
divinity than anywhere else. Again, the philosophical
content of the line is perfect, and beyond all criticism. It is
not said that the person having these qualities is divine.
Whoever be the person, and whatever be his past, when
764

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

on occasions he expresses these qualities, we can perceive
a clearer vision of Life's glory THROUGH HIM.
In short, these are the qualities which, when manifest,
create such adjustments in the inner equipments in man,
that we can perceive, through him, more clearly the
awesome vitality of Life's surge. As a transferred epithet,
Lord the Self declares that among the feminine qualities, "I
am any one of these, or all of them put together."
THE LORD AGAIN GIVES FOUR MORE INDICATIONS
TO MAKE THE SELF-INTRODUCTION CLEAR TO
ARJUNA:
35. Among hymns also I am the 'BRIHAT-SAMAN' ; among
metres 'GAYATRI' am I; among months I am parts of
December-January (MARGA-SHIRSHA) ; among seasons I
am the 'flowery-spring. '
OF THE SAMANS I AM THE BRIHAT-SAMAN --- The
songs of the Sama-Veda are called the Samans. These
hymns are all in different metres, and they are to be sung
in different tunes. It is no easy task, and the students who
can sing the Samans well had to spend years of practice at
the feet of their Master. Of all the metres that are met with
in the volume of the Sama-Veda, the most difficult and
complicated is the metre called 'Brihati'; and the Samans
composed in; the Brihati-metre are called the 'Brihat-sama.'
765

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OF ALL METRES I AM GAYATRI --- Talking of metres
Bhagawan seems to have all of a sudden remembered that
there are different varieties of metres and, of them, Gayatri
is considered as the most divine and extremely powerful.
Gayatri is a metre composed of three lines, each fulfilled in
eight syllables. This metre is held in India in great esteem,
and with an added sense of divinity, because the most
famous hymn, glorifying the Sun (Savitru), chanted by all
Brahmins, in their morning and evening ablutions, is
composed in this metre.
Of all the metres none has been so uniformly glorified
everywhere as "Gayatri," and the mantra has had so far the
privilege of being chanted by so many devotees,
continuously for such a long number of years, in any other
religion in the world.
OF THE MONTHS I AM THE MARGA-SHIRSHA --- This
corresponds to parts of the English calender months of
December and January which are the months in India,
each year, when people do not think of the fatiguing
summer which is to arrive soon and they have stopped
complaining about the wet monsoon.
OF THE SEASONS I AM THE FLOWER-BEARING
SPRING --- Spring, with its colourful message and
fragrant songs, gives a thrill to all prospects wherever one
may turn in India. Flower-valleys clothe the hills. Crops
cover the field. Tanks and pools get strewn with lotus and
766

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

lilies. The meadows roll out green carpets of grass. There
is an air
of celebration and festivity in the hearts of all, and in
order to crown the joyous spirit in the world, the moon
seems to dress herself in more glory than usual.
NOT ONLY AM I TO BE RECOGNISED AMONG THE
MAJESTIC AND THE DIVINE, AMONG THE
BEAUTIFUL AND THE CHARMING, BUT ALSO
AMONG THE LOWEST OF THE LOW: I AM WHAT I
AM: FOR, LISTEN:
36. I am the gambling of the fraudulent; I am the splendour of
the splendid; I am victory; I am the industry (in those who are
determined) ; I am the goodness in
the good.
OF ALL THE DECEPTIVE GAMES I AM THE DICEPLAY --- The Geeta contains the discourses given to
Arjuna, (the royal warrior, a Prince of that time) by
Krishna, in a great missionary spirit, to help the Prince to
re-discover the vitality of his own religion --- Hinduism.
The attempt of the Geeta is, therefore, to re-orient the
Hindus about Hinduism. A missionary cannot bring about
this re-orientation successfully, unless the spirit of our
scriptures is explained to the common folk in their own
language. To Arjuna, the example given here is the most
767

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

striking. For, his entire life had been a series of tragedies
which he had to suffer because of his elder brother's
irresistible weakness to play the dice. No other example
would have delivered the goods to Arjuna as efficiently as
this one.
To modern students, this may not strike as very effective
since dice is not a game very popular with us just now.
But the substitutes are very easily recognised.
SPLENDOUR IN THE SPLENDID AM I --- At the same
time, a seeker, who is ready to make use of this portion for
meditation as it should be, will easily understand that the
Shastra has said almost nothing. The splendour in a
splendid object has not the qualities of the object from
which the shine comes out. The splendour, in itself, has no
qualities even --- it is merely AN EXPERIENCE. To
facilitate that "experience," the mind borrows the light to
illumine the magnitude and the glory of the object, but the
splendour itself has nothing to do with the ingredients or
constituents that together give rise to the experience of the
splendour in our bosom. In short, as Sri Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa once said, "Truth, no doubt, is Light, but it
is 'light' without its properties."
I AM VICTORY; I AM EFFORT, I AM THE GOODNESS
IN THE GOOD --- As explained above, here also it is these
qualities, nay, the "experiences" lived in the presence of
these qualities, that gives us an occasion to live the Self.
These qualities connote a certain mental condition created
768

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

by the very special type of its thought-vibrations. When
these are sustained for a long period, the bosom becomes
quiet and still. The reflected glory of Awareness becomes,
in such a bosom, almost as glorious as the Reality and,
therefore, as we said earlier, here too, by employing a
transferred-epithet, THE VERY QUALITIES ARE
DECLARED AS THE SELF.
We should not forget that these FIFTY-FOUR items of
analogy, given in this chapter to indicate "THE ONE IN
THE MANY" are all meant to be as many items of
contemplation, to be meditated upon by all sincere
seekers. This is not an OBJECTIVE narration and, as such,
no true student of the Geeta can ever expect his education
to be complete unless he understands the true meaning of
these stanzas in his SUBJECTIVE experience.
STILL IF YOU NEED ELABORATION, ARJUNA, YOU
MAY HAVE SOME MORE. LISTEN:
37. Among the VRISHNIS I am 'VAASUDEVA' ; among the
PANDAVAS, (I am) 'DHANANJAYA' ; also among the
MUNIS I am 'VYASA' ; and among the poets I am 'USHANA,
' the great Seer.
OF THE VRISHNIS, I AM VAASUDEVA --- Among the
Yadavas, the ancestor Yadu had a son Vrishni. All the
descendants of Vrishni together constitute the tribe called
the 'Vrishnis.' In this tribe was born Vasudeva as the great769

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

great-grandson of Vrishni. Vasudeva married Devaki, the
sister of the Mathura-tyrant, Kamsa, and to her was born
Krishna. As the son of Vasudeva, the Lord is called
"Vaasudeva."
OF THE PANDAVAS, I AM DHANANJAYA --- Just as
Krishna was the mighty one that had given pride and
glory to both the Yadavakula and the Vrishni-clan, because
of which they have a glorious existence in the memory of
man, so too among the Pandavas, He again was the soulgiving factor, but for whom, the five brothers would
perhaps have achieved nothing. The term Dhananjaya
literally means "the winner of wealth." Generally, this
term is considered as a title of Arjuna, and therefore, this
portion is usually translated as "I AM ARJUNA, AMONG
THE PANDAVAS."
OF ALL THE SAINTS I AM VYASA --- This is not an
unfair passage of self-advertisement thrown in by Vyasa
himself, the author of the Geeta. Vyasa was a pen-name
which came to symbolise the new style of literature that
was discovered and introduced into the realm of
philosophical and religious writings of that age. The style
was revolutionary, for, till then, philosophical literature
was in mantra-form --- "thoughts packed into small
language-capsules." With the Puranas, a new style was
initiated and developed, where elaboration was the
motive and repeated over-emphasis of the fundamentals
was the general technique. This was innovated by Krishna
770

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Dwaipayana under a suggestive pen-name, Vyasa,
explaining in itself his own literary art of elaboration.
Thus "OF ALL THE MUNIS, I AM VYASA" should
suggest that of all the men of reflection, the Lord is He,
who is behind the stupendous work that stands today
under the title 'Puranas.'
OF THE SEERS, I AM USHANA --- Nowhere do we find
any mention of this seer in the available popular books.
But Anandagiri somehow identifies Ushana with Shukra,
though he too does not explain how he identifies these
two together. The planet Venus, also called Shukra, was
the son of Bhrigu, and the preceptor of the Daityas. Shukra
is called Kavi in the Rig Veda.
In the Upanishads, Kavi means a seer of the Vedic mantras.
Men of inspiration, declaring their experiences, without
ego-centric awareness, were called Kavis; later on the term
deteriorated to mean writers of poetry, who too, at the
sight of the spectacular Universe got themselves lifted
from themselves and seemed to enter into a realm of their
own brilliant notions, from the caves of which they sang
their harmonious rhythm of poetic cadence. Here,
however, it is used in the original meaning as a seer.
FURTHER, IF I MAY ELABORATE, I AM, SAYS THE
LORD:

771

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

38. Among punishers I am the 'Sceptre' ; among those who seek
victory, I am 'Statesmanship' ; and also among secrets, I am
'Silence' ; and I am the 'Knowledge' among knowers.
OF THE CHASTISERS, I AM THE SCEPTRE --- The ruler
and the ruled must both prevail in the State, if they desire
progressively to push ahead the standard of living in the
various communities. The law-giver must see that he
governs by enforcing the laws. In the function of the
government, the governor will, of necessity, become the
punisher of the unsocial members of the community, who
are tempted, in their selfishness, to disobey the existing
laws in the community. The ruled, in their loyalty and
reverence to the existing laws, generally succumb to the
punishments meted out to them by their rulers. But, in
fact, who is that who really gives the powers, to the King
or the President, to punish the misbehaving individuals?
After all, in modern states, individuals have no right to
take the law into their own hands.
The King wields the sceptre, which is the symbol of his
power to punish. To the President in a democratic
institution, the sanction to punish is given by the public
will of the people. In the policeman at the street-corner,
the power to arrest is attached to his uniform. A King
devoid of his sceptre, a President who has been thrown
out, or a dismissed policeman --- none of them has any
longer the power to chastise the wicked. Naturally,
therefore, "OF ALL THOSE WHO PUNISH," the Lord
says, "I AM THE SCEPTRE." Without the symbol of the
772

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

social sanction, no individual in the community has any
right over the others. After all, be he a King or a President,
be he a policeman or a judge, all of them are in themselves
only members of the community, but they play the part of
guarding the security of the community, because of the
special privileges they possess due to the status of their
office.
OF CONQUERERS, I AM STATE-CRAFT --- That a mere
physical conquest is no victory at all, is the repeated
declaration of all history text-books. No nation,
community, society, or individual can, in fact, be
considered as having conquered merely because of the
force that has smothered their enemy, or because of the
might that is standing guard over them. The conquest of a
community can be complete only when the conqueror has,
through intelligent administrative policies, brought the
conquered to identify their culture and thought-patterns
with his own. If the conquerors are not capable of
converting the conquered, or getting themselves
converted to the cultural values of the conquered, the
conquest is never complete. This is an open secret to every
student of history. After the military conquest, through
statesmanship alone, can real baptism come, and this
alone can bring the conquered permanently under the will
of the conqueror. "I AM STATE-CRAFT" by which all
conquerors are really conquerors.
OF THINGS SECRET, I AM SILENCE --- Secrecy is
maintained in and nourished by silence. When a secret is
773

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ventilated in open discussions, it is no longer a secret.
Thus the very essence of a secret lies in silence. So too, it
may be noted that the Knowledge of the Self is described
in our text-books as "the secret of secrets," because it is not
generally known. This great secret is also experienced,
and the divine experience is maintained and enjoyed,
sustained and nourished, as well as fed and grown, only
upon the deep inner silence. Of all secret things, the Lord
is the deep and unbroken Silence!
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE KNOWER AM I --- The
wisdom of the wise is not the wise themselves, and yet, it
is not anything different from them. The Self is not the
body, and yet, we cannot say that the body is anything
different from the Self, which is All-pervading. The
envelopments of matter and their worlds of experiences
are all the aura of glory that shines out around the Self.
The knowledge in the knower or the wisdom in the wise,
is the expression of the Glory Divine, because of a certain
pattern maintained among the inner personalities in the
individuals concerned.
SUMMING UP ALL THAT HE HAD SAID SO FAR IN A
BEAUTIFUL PERORATION, THE LORD SAYS:
39. And whatsoever is the seed of all beings, that also am I, O
Arjuna; there is no being, whether moving, or unmoving, that
can exist without Me.
774

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

I AM THAT WHICH IS THE SEED OF ALL --- In all the
above descriptive phrases, indicating through analogies
the nature, place and function of the Self in the scheme of
the perceptible world of forms, thoughts and ideas, it was
constantly suggested that the Self is the "Source of all
creation." In order to hammer this idea into the dullwitted so that no student of the Geeta might overlook and
ignore this wonderful idea which is the essence of all
Knowledge-spiritual, Vyasa, again and again, makes
Krishna repeat this essential truth, in a hundred different
suggestive expressions.
The analogy of the seed and the tree is an inexhaustible
theme for the meditators to contemplate upon. Under
favourable conditions, the dormant life-content in the seed
can manifest itself, and, ere long, the germinated seed can
grow out to inconceivable heights and may thereafter look
as though it has no relationship to the very seed from
which it has sprung up. One who is viewing only the
finite world of plurality --- and mourning under the
sledge-hammer of change and constant death --- may not
find in Samsara anything to remind him of the Divine,
Infinite and Blissful, as the Source from which the finite
and sorrowful Samsara has burst forth into expression.
The 'seed-condition of the Universe' is equivalent to the
dormant condition of the tree before its manifestation
among the two lobes of the dicotyledonous seed. Under
favourable conditions, of course, the primary-shoot and
the root-system will emerge, one ascending upwards to be
775

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the tree and the other burrowing down into the soil, to be
the roots. The entire Universe of names and forms, in its
condition of dormancy, remaining in seed-form, is the
"state-of-pralaya," conceived by and accepted in our
Upanishads. This cosmic dissolution becomes more
intelligible to us when we notice it happening in
ourselves. In the state-of-sleep, our individual
temperament, character, capability, education, culture,
decency, etiquette, etc., all are in a condition of dormancy.
In short, in sleep our personality-peculiarities remain in a
seed-condition. When these vasanas, after an interval of
restful poise, get impatient to express themselves, they
emerge, and when the conditions are favourable, each of
them manifests itself fully.
The restful state of the TOTAL-mind-intellect, and
therefore, of all the vasanas in all of us in their condition of
rest, would be the TOTAL-pralaya and, at that time the
whole Universe merges back to become the "seed." This is
an illuminating example of the poetic way of expression
used by all our ancient seers. This pregnant condition of
the potential energy, which, after a time and under
suitable circumstances, will emerge to express itself, is
termed by the brilliant seers of Upanishads as the State-ofHiranyagarbha. To translate this marvellous term as the
"Golden Egg" is one of the blasphemies unconsciously
committed by the Western translators who have thereby
outraged the beauty of our scriptures. "The womb of all
things and beings," is all that is indicated by the term,
Hiranyagarbha.
776

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Lord is here identifying himself with the Total-causalbodies of the world, meaning the "total-vasana" in all the
creatures, and therefore, as Ishwara, He declares that the
Self is the One-great-seed from which the Tree-of-Samsara
has emerged and will, in future, emerge for an infinite
number of times.
By the statement "I AM THE SEED OF THE UNIVERSE,"
the students of the Geeta might, during their reflection,
come to a wrong conclusion altogether, inasmuch as in the
outer world the seed itself dies to become the tree.
Similarly, the Lord, while creating the world, might have
destroyed Himself! To remove this misconception,
Krishna says here, "NONE CAN EXIST WITHOUT ME,
NEITHER THE MOVING, NOR THE UNMOVING."
Not only is the Lord the Seed of the Universe, but even
after its germination and growth, the 'tree' is also
sustained by the Self. The ocean is the 'seed,' no doubt, of
all waves, that arise on the sea's surface. And yet, when all
the waves germinate as it were, and grow up, none of
them can stand apart from the Source, from which they
arose. Where there is no ocean, no waves can stand, and
wherever there are waves, they cannot sustain themselves
except upon the grace of the ocean.
The cosmos rises up from the PRINCIPLE OF
IGNORANCE that seemingly veils the Truth. This avidya
(ignorance) also exists, drawing its potencies, however
delusory they may be, from the Total-Source of all
777

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

projections. This IGNORANCE of the Self, we know, is the
'seed' from which all the experienced worlds of the
Universe have risen up. If the Awareness in us, Absolute
and Eternal, were not to 'illumine' the very IGNORANCE
for us, the ignorance-produced sighs and sorrows, and the
perceptions of plurality will not at all be available for us;
we would not have been aware
of them.
Thus, just as water is the cause for starting the
germination in the 'seed,' and again, it is water alone that
can nourish and sustain the tree, even after the tree has
expanded itself to its greater dimensions, so too, the
Divine Self, which, by its magic-touch, thrills the seed of
samsara to germinate and thrive, is Itself the nourisher and
the sustainer of its dimensions at all times.
When we are told that ten sample-pieces of ornaments
have all emerged from one mass of gold, and when this
statement is reinforced by a pertinent codicil that, without
gold, none of these sample pieces can ever exist by itself
even for a moment, it becomes evident that all of them are
nothing but gold. Drawing a parallel, the Lord tells us that
He is the very seed from which the entire multiple
Universe has risen; and this partial statement of truth is
complete when it is amended by the statement in the
second line that "NONE CAN EXIST WITHOUT ME."
Lord Cotton can say, "all the samples of cloth that are
manufactured and used in the world have come from Me":
778

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

then it will be only true if Lord Cotton completes his
statement by saying, "No sample of cloth can ever exist
without Me, the Cotton-Essence."
DRAWING TOGETHER THE VARIOUS LINES OF
ARGUMENTS MADE SO FAR, KRISHNA NOW WINDS
UP THIS SECTION OF HIS DISCOURSE IN THE
FOLLOWING THREE VERSES:
40. There is no end to My Divine Glories, O Parantapa; but,
this is but a brief statement by Me of the particulars of My
Divine Glories.
THERE IS NO END TO MY GLORIES --- These
enumerations of the transcendental glories of the Eternal
were actually started in this chapter, in a cry of intelligent
despair at the magnitude of the task and at the frailty of
language to express them all. And yet, out of sheer love
for the disciple, the Eternal Master in Krishna took the job
in hand and tried to make the best of a bad job. No potmaker can ever indicate to an enquirer, the "mud essence"
distinctly in each of the existing pots and congratulate
himself in the end that he has exhausted all the pots that
were, are, and shall ever be. It will be foolish vanity to
hope to succeed in such a hopeless endeavour. And, in
fact, it is not necessary also. If, in ten or twenty specimens,
the Knower-of-the-Essence indicates to the seeker, the
"Essential Stuff" in each distinctly, as separate from their
names and forms and other attributes, it should be
779

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

possible for the seeker to recognise for himself the Essence
when he meets the next specimen.
In this chapter, the Lord has given to Arjuna and over his
shoulders to the entire generations of Geeta-students who
may listen to Him in the world, the above FIFTY-FOUR
instances, wherein the play of the Infinite, as recognised
through the apparent veils of matter, has been shown. By
now, any student who has meditated sufficiently upon
those instances, must have educated his mind fully to
discover for himself the One Infinite behind the finite
multiplicity.
In utter despair at not being able to exhaust the infinite
varieties of the pluralistic phenomenal world, Krishna
declares that "there is no end to the 'rays' of My glory
when I, being resplendent in My Absolute Perfection,
shine out in my self-effulgence."
If this knowledge was already with the Lord, why did He,
as a spiritual teacher, bluff His disciples all along in a
futile attempt to reveal Himself through the finite forms?
Why this deception by the Divine? Why disappoint the
students after straining them so long? Is this the general
trait of all the religious teachers, prophets, seers and
masters?
The answer to such accusations against the technique of
religion is that --- "there is no other way"! A medical
college student is asked to do a series of operations, upon
780

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

a dead body, that has become cold last week-end!! This is
no bluff; but, it is true, for all the careful and efficient
surgery, the "patient" dead as he is, will not start his life
again. Such training on the dumb objects is necessary to
give the student the required experience before he can
start his independent activities in the profession.
Similarly, here too, the Lord provides Arjuna with some
specific examples in order to teach him the ART OF
SEEING THE UNSEEN THROUGH THE SEEN.
This intention in his heart is clear in his own confession in
the second line: "BUT, BY BRIEF EXAMPLES ONLY
HAVE I DECLARED MY DIVINE GLORY." The Lord has
not exhausted Himself; but He chooses a few effective
examples to educate the mind of His listeners. Those who
have ardently meditated upon these examples, will learn
to recognise the Infinite in all its unending resplendence
enthroned in the bosom of every finite form.
IN SHORT, THE LORD SUMMARIES ALL THAT HE
HAS SAID SO FAR:
41. Whatever it is that is glorious, prosperous or powerful in
any being, know that to be a manifestation of a part of My
splendour.
The above examples have made a frail attempt to indicate
the glories of the Lord, but in no sense can those
descriptions be considered as having defined the Truth.
781

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

However, we have been given an idea that the Divine, the
Imperishable, can be detected in the realm of the undivine
and the perishable, if we look for it with discriminative
judgement. From the above examples it becomes clear that
the Lord is present in all names and forms, revealing
Himself as the glorious, or the great, or the mighty aspect
in all things and beings.
Here, Krishna directly summarises what exactly
constitutes the Divine Presence in the world of plurality,
and provides Arjuna with an acid test in knowing it.
Whatever is great, or glorious, or mighty is nothing but
the expression of a ray of the Lord's own Infinite
Splendour. This is no doubt, a wonderful summary of the
above mentioned FIFTY-FOUR assorted items. Each one
of these examples is a clear-cut instance, indicating the
Lord, either as the Great one in the whole species, or as
the noblest and the most glorious thing, or happening, or
as the most mighty among all that is powerful.
This indication was given expressly to facilitate Arjuna's
recognition of the IMMANENT glory of the Lord in the
things of the world. It can be equally useful for us,
students of the Geeta, in seeking and perceiving the play
of the Infinite among the finite and the changing
phenomena of names and forms.
IN THE END, PANTINGLY CONCLUDING
ENUMERATIONS, THE LORD SAYS:

THE

782

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

42. But, of what avail to thee is the knowledge of all these
details, O Arjuna? I exist, supporting this whole world by one
part of Myself.
In an inspired surge of friendliness and love, though
Krishna, in all haste, promised that He would explain "His
expression in the individual" (Yoga) apart from the
description of "His glory as the Cosmic man" (Vibhuti), He
Himself realised, whilst trying to indicate Himself object
by object, the impossibility of exhausting the treatment.
Infinite are the total number of things and beings in the
Universe, and it is never possible to exhaust all of them
one by one. With a cry of despair, and yet in an attitude of
extreme love for his disciple, Lord Krishna brilliantly
summarises this chapter in this closing stanza.
WHAT WILL IT AVAIL THEE TO KNOW ALL THESE
DIVERSITIES --- In fact it is useless to explain the presence
of the Infinite in every finite form. It is impossible for a
pot-maker to show the mud in all the existing pots in the
world; nor can any one indicate the ocean-aspect in every
wave in the sea. All that we can do is explain to the
student the art of recognising the mud aspect in a few pots
so that the student can independently come to recognise
mud in all existing pots. It is never possible for a
mathematics teacher to exhaust all the examples, but the
student is taught the art of solving problems through a
limited number of typical examples, and thereafter, the
783

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

student, all by himself, gains the capacity to solve any
similar problem independently.
I, WITH ONE PART OF MYSELF, SUPPORT THIS
WHOLE UNIVERSE --- In philosophical usage, the term
Jagat means "all the fields of experiences which man has,
as a physical body, as a psychological being and as an
intellectual entity." This would mean that the Jagat is the
sum-total of the world perceived by my senses, plus the
world of my emotions and sentiments, plus the world of
my ideas and ideologies. The entire field that is
comprehended by the sense organs, the mind and the
intellect, is to be understood in its totality as Jagat. In
short, this term conveniently embraces, in its meaning and
import, the entire "realm of objects."
The declaration here in the last line, therefore means that
the total world-of-objects is supported, tended and
nourished by a quarter of --- meaning, a portion of --- the
Subject, the Self. Krishna, as the Self, naturally declares
here that the whole Jagat is supported by a portion of His
glory. The statement has yet another philosophical
implication, inasmuch as it declares that there are in the
Truth vast portions which are uncontaminated by the
disturbances which we call Jagat. No doubt, in the
homogeneous Truth, there cannot be distinctly separate
portions of different features; however, this is a kindly
method of indicating a transcendental idea with the
terrestrial words of finite language.
784

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the tenth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF DIVINE GLORIES
We have already explained the Term 'Vibhuti' during our
discussions in this chapter. This becomes a Yoga inasmuch
as students, earnestly following the path, would try to
attune their mental perception and intellectual
comprehensions so as to recognise the greatness, or the
glory, or the might in the things and situations, and
recognise them as a pencil of the Divine ray in themselves
emerging from the glorious effulgence of the Self, to peep
through the manifold finite embodiments.
Om Om Om Om Om

785

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 11
Vishwa Roopa Darshana Yoga
THE Yoga of the Vision of the Universal Form
Arjuna Said: 1. By this word of the highest secret concerning
the Self, which You have spoken out of compassion towards me,
my delusion is gone.
In this opening stanza, Arjuna expresses his complete
satisfaction at the details regarding the glories of the Lord
which were described in the previous chapter, Arjuna
appreciated that so much labour was spent by Krishna
only to bless his disciple and bring him out of delusion. To
realise the unity in the diversity is to get an inoculation
against the sorrows of plurality. The deft pen of Vyasa
beautifully registers the effectiveness of the last chapter
upon a sincere student when he makes Arjuna confess,
"THIS, MY DELUSION, IS GONE."
REMOVAL OF A DELUSION or a misunderstanding IS
NOT IN ITSELF THE ACQUISITION OF KNOWLEDGE
of the Real. Removal of delusion is one aspect of the
process of knowing the Truth. Arjuna must be rightly
feeling that his delusion --- his firm faith in the
separativeness of names and forms --- can no longer hold
its grounds when his intellect has been educated to look
786

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

forward to, and detect the "presence" of the Divine in the
very world of his perceptions. But at the same time, he has
not gained any visible experience of the Unity in the
diversity; he has no personal experience of the oneness of
things and beings, although theoretically at least, his
intellect has come to accept this inherent Oneness.
The Pandava Prince, Arjuna, realises that Krishna has so
elaborately explained the theme in the previous chapter
only "out of compassion towards me" (Mad-anugrahaya).
This reminds us of Krishna using almost the same term
(X-2) when He explains how He, abiding in the hearts of
his devotees, destroys all their inner darkness born out of
ignorance.
OUT OF COMPASSION FOR ARJUNA, WHAT WERE
THE SUPREMELY PROFOUND WORDS THAT WERE
GIVEN OUT BY THE LORD? LISTEN:
2. The origin and destruction of beings verily, have been heard
by me in detail from You, O Lotus-eyed Krishna, and also Your
inexhaustible greatness.
It is natural, in a discussion between the teacher and the
taught, that at the end of a difficult lesson, on approaching
the teacher with his doubts, the student should first of all
prove to him that he has sufficiently understood the
theme
787

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of the discussion. This entitles the student to ask the
teacher his doubts and get them cleared. Following this
traditional method, Arjuna is trying to show Krishna that
he has completely understood the main theme of the last
chapter. He has listened to Krishna and understood the
"ORIGIN AND DISSOLUTION OF BEINGS, AND THE
GREATNESS AND THE INEXHAUSTIBLE GLORY OF
THE LORD."
And yet, a doubt remains which can be removed only
when his intellect is convinced by a confident knowledge
arising out of an actually observed demonstration. The
stanza is preparing to meet such a demand. When a
student, who has proved to have understood the logic of
discussion already carried out, asks a legitimate question,
or enquires after the remedy for a possible obstacle, a true
teacher must help him out of his troubles by all possible
means. We shall observe here in this chapter that the great
Yogeshwara (Krishna), out of sheer kindness, even
condescends to show Arjuna the form of the Cosmic-Man
because the disciple has demanded that he must see it.
THE DEMAND OF THE DISCIPLE IS DESCRIBED IN
THE FOLLOWING VERSE:
3. (Now) O Supreme Lord! As you have thus described
Yourself, I wish to see (actually) Your Form Divine, O
PURUSHOTTAMA.
788

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Indicating by a familiar idiom in Sanskrit, "So be it" (evametat), Arjuna accepts the technical thesis that has been
declared by the Lord. Intellectually, it has been
satisfactorily proved that the Lord is immanent in all
names and forms. Still the intellect awaits the baptism of a
demonstration. Therefore Arjuna says, "I DESIRE TO SEE
YOUR ISHWARA-FORM." He is Ishwara who in Himself,
expresses omnipotence, infinite wisdom, strength, virtue
and splendour; these are the six qualities that are
described in our shastras as forming the characteristic
features of the God-principle.
This was the occasion on which Krishna decided to show
to Arjuna that the LORD IS NOT ONLY IMMANENT in
all forms, but He is also the vehicle or receptacle in which
all names and forms have their existence and play --- HE
IS ALSO TRANSCENDENT.
Though, with the enthusiasm of a fanatic believer in
intellectualism, Arjuna demands a demonstration, he
immediately realises that his audacity has, perhaps,
crossed the frontiers of decency.
HE IS TRYING TO SMOOTHEN HIS WORDS OUT IN
THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
4. If you, O Lord, think it possible for me to see It, do You
please, then, O Lord of YOGAS, show me Your Imperishable
Self-form.
789

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The demand in the previous stanza has been repeated
here, with a dignified humility and pure reverence. In our
ordinary life, in all our respectful appeals and humble
petitions we use such phrases as: "If I may be permitted to
say," "I shall be much obliged if," "I have the honour to
submit," "If I may have the leave to say so," etc. The
Pandava Prince, as a result of a second thought, as it were,
smoothens his solider-like abrupt language used in the
previous stanza and says that the Lord's IMMUTABLE
Universal Form may be shown to him --- "IF YOU THINK
I AM CAPABLE OF SEEING IT."
The modesty and reverence shown here are not
expressions of a faked emotion for cheap fulfilment of
desires. This is evident from the term he is using in
addressing the Lord in the verse. In the first line we find
Krishna being addressed as "O Lord" (Prabho), and in the
following line He is again addressed as "the Lord of Yogas"
(Yogeshwara). These clearly indicate that Arjuna has come
to feel that Krishna is not a mere mortal teacher, capable
of giving only some intellectual ventilations and spiritual
discourses, but that "He is Himself Divine and a Masterof-Yoga," and therefore, he is capable of fulfilling the
request, if the "teacher" in Krishna is satisfied that the
"student" in Arjuna will be benefited by such a
demonstration.
THE HUMBLE REQUEST OF AN EARNEST STUDENT
NEVER FALLS ON DEAF EARS, IF IT IS MADE TO A
TRUE TEACHER:
790

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Blessed Lord said: 5. Behold, O Partha, forms of Me, by
hundreds and thousands, of different sorts Divine, of various
colours and shapes.
If gold is the essential stuff in all the ornaments, every
ornament in the world must be available in the total gold.
To see the gold in the ornaments is relatively easy, it being
a PHYSICAL PERCEPTION. But to detect the presence of
all ornaments of different shapes and colours in the total
gold is comparatively difficult, inasmuch as it is the
VISION OF THE INTELLECT.
Keeping this idea in mind, when you read the opening
lines of the Lord's words, it becomes strikingly significant.
"BEHOLD, BY HUNDREDS AND THOUSANDS, MY
DIFFERENT FORMS CELESTIAL, VARIED IN COLOURS
AND SHAPES." It was not necessary for Krishna to
change His form to that of the Cosmic-Man; all that
Arjuna had to do was to BEHOLD THE FORM right in
front of him. But, unfortunately, the instrument-ofperception was not tuned up for the object of his
investigation, and therefore, Arjuna could not perceive
that which was already in Krishna.
That which is lying beyond the focal length of a telescope,
cannot be viewed by the observer even though the object
may be present in line with the axis of the instrument. In
order to bring the farther object within the span of vision,
the observer will have to make the required adjustments
791

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in the telescope. Similarly, Krishna did not TRANSFORM
Himself into His Cosmic-Form, but He only helped
Arjuna to make the necessary inward adjustments so that
he could perceive what was there evidently in Krishna.
Naturally, the Lord says, "BEHOLD." The total world of
perceivable beings of all shapes and colours is indicated in
the enumeration made by the Lord in the stanza.
WHAT ARE THOSE?
6. Behold the ADITYAS, the VASUS, the RUDRAS, the (two)
ASHWINS and also the MARUTS; behold many wonders
never seen before, O Bharata.
In enumerating the items that are to be seen in Krishna's
Cosmic-Form, the Lord hints at the most important and
striking of them. This is generally done when we try to
describe a crowd of people or things by using a short
representative term. Mention is made on all such
occasions of the most important items or personalities --the few who represent the whole crowd.
With a note of despair ringing through his words, the
Lord concludes "BEHOLD MANY MORE SUCH
WONDERS AS NEVER SEEN BEFORE." The various
items enumerated have all been already explained in the
previous chapter* Of them the only new term used here is
the Ashwini Kumaras, the Horsemen-Twins. It is not very
clear in literature as to what exactly is the identity of these
792

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

twins with heads of horses. It is not very easy to decide
what they represent. In some places they are described as
the Dawn and the Dusk, and in other places there are
sufficient evidences to make us suspect that they represent
the Morning-Star and the Evening-Star. Anyway, they are
Angels that go to serve their devotees in times of utter
need and despair.
BY GIVING A COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF THE
THINGS TO BE EXPECTED IN THE COSMIC-VISION,
KRISHNA HAS INCREASED THE INTELLECTUAL
CURIOSITY OF HIS DISCIPLE. WHERE EXACTLY IS HE
TO LOOK FOR THESE THINGS? ... LISTEN:
7. Now behold, O Gudakesha, in this Body, that the whole
universe centres in One --- including, the moving and the
unmoving --- and whatever else you desire to see.
The enthusiastic seeker's adventurous mind having been
sufficiently educated so far to develop an unending
wealth of 'eagerness to know,' Krishna further educates,
sharpening in the student, the 'anxiety to know' in this
mind, with sufficient details on what he may expect in the
Divine Vision that is to follow. This secret technique then
makes the student ardently converge all this attention
towards one given Form Divine. This is achieved by his
verse. If we follow the technique, developed through the
expressed words, we shall find that Vyasa has here
793

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

explained the entire Science of Love as adumbrated in the
Cult of Bhakti, or 'Devotion to the Supreme.'
The entire Universe, constituted both of the moving and
the unmoving --- of the sentient and the insentient --- is
being shown by Krishna on his own physical structure as
described by the effective intimate term, "Here,
concentrated" (Iha-ekastham). And this term has been
annotated in the same stanza as "In this, My Body" (mama
dehe). The entire Universe of gross forms, both movable
and immovable, is to be compressed within the
framework of Krishna's girth and height. As we explained
earlier* the concept of space has not been completely
sponged out of Arjuna's mind but a total space-concept
equivalent to Krishna's own mortal dimensions is left in
him. With this mind, when Arjuna looks out, he must
necessarily see framed in Krishna all at once, the entire
Universe compressed and miniatured with all its multiple
details intact.
Even though "the entire Universe, including both the
moving and the unmoving" is a term sufficiently elastic so
as not to leave anything outside its implications, Krishna
again sharpens the enthusiasm of Arjuna by stating that
the Pandava could see anything "ELSE THAT YOU
DESIRE TO SEE." As a typical mortal, Arjuna is
preoccupied with the particular problem of life and his
anxiety naturally grows to peep into the future and
discover its solution rather than to realise the underlying
794

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

oneness that embraces even the forms in the outer worldof-matter.
"THE ONE IN THE MANY" HAS BEEN DESCRIBED IN
THE LAST CHAPTER, AND HERE WE ARE ABOUT TO
SEE "THE MANY IN THE ONE."
8. But You are not able to behold Me with these Your own eyes;
I give You the divine-eye; behold My lordly YOGA.
We have already explained how it is relatively easy to see
the essential stuff as the core of individual names and
forms, but the reverse of it --- to discover the many in the
one --- is the work of a subtle intellect functioning through
right philosophical understanding. TO READ a poem,
only a knowledge of the alphabet is necessary; but to
understand its subtler beauties and to classify it in a
comparative study with other similar poems, it needs a
masterly mind that has been well soaked with the masterpieces in poetry. Similarly, to see "THE ONE IN THE
MANY" is the work of a 'heart' soaked with faith; but to
PERCEIVE "THE MANY IN THE ONE," we need, besides
the 'heart,' an educated 'intellect' that has learnt to see for
itself the logic of the philosophers. This peculiar capacity
of an educated intellect to see the extraordinary is the
vision of the intellect which is gained when we develop
the faculty to perceive and to know.

795

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This obvious fact is explained by the Lord in this stanza,
"YOU CANNOT SEE ME WITH THESE EYES OF YOURS;
I GIVE THEE THE VISION DIVINE." There are very many
critics who try to explain this "Divine-eye" through
fantastic suppositions and ridiculous theories. Such
commentators are certainly men, not much educated in
the style of the Hindu scriptures, the Upanishads.
Expressly and tacitly, all through the Upanishads, it is
repeatedly explained that the subtler cannot be brought
within the scope and compass of the instruments-ofperception given to man. The external sense organs can
play freely only in the outer world-of-objects. Even when
we ordinarily "see an idea" it is not done with our outer
pair of eyes. The intellectual comprehension is meant here
by the term "seeing" and the capacity of the intellect to
comprehend is the 'Divine-eye.'
This "special-vision" is given to the Pandava Prince so that
he may see "MY SUPREME YOGA-POWER" by which the
whole Universe of multiplicity is being supported by the
Lord's own form. Earlier, this particular Yoga-Power of the
Lord, has been already described at two different places,
(VII-12 and IX-4) almost in identical terms.
THE SCENE SHIFTS TO HASTINAPURA, IN THE
PALACE OF DHRITARASHTRA:

796

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Sanjaya said: 9. Having thus spoken, O King, the great Lord of
YOGA, Hari, showed to Partha His Supreme Form, as the Lord
(of the Universe).
The versatile genius of Vyasa has never left anything that
he has touched without raising it to the most sublime
heights of perfection. With unimaginable capacities for
composing incomparable poetry, unique prose-diction,
chaste descriptions, artistic, literary designs, original
innovations both in thought and form --- a brilliant
philosopher, a man of consummate wisdom, a genius in
worldly knowledge, at one time in the palace, at another
time in the battle-field, at still another time in Badrinath,
and again, among the silent snow peaks --- strode the
colossus, Sri Vyasa, as an embodiment of what is best in
the Hindu tradition and in the Aryan culture. Such an allround genius has not yet been reported ever to have been
born, lived or achieved so much in the history of this
globe, at any other time!
After Lord Krishna gave Arjuna a hint as to what he
should expect and where he would gain the vision of the
Cosmic-Man, etc., Vyasa introduces a small section in
which Sanjaya reports to Dhritarashtra, the blind father of
the wicked Kauravas.
The literary purpose served by this stanza is only to show
to the readers that Krishna, according to his promise, had
actually revealed his Cosmic-Form to Arjuna. But along
with that, the deft mastery of the ancient writer of
797

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Mahabharata tries to paint for us the mental attitude and
the inward sympathies of Sanjaya. We have stated earlier
that
Sanjaya
is
"OUR
OWN
SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT." His sympathies are clearly with the
Pandavas, the friends of the Lord. This tendency in
Sanjaya is unquestionably revealed when he addressed his
own master merely as "O King" (Rajan) while he uses the
terms, (a) Mahayogeshwara ... "the Great Lord of Yoga" and
(b) Harih ... "the one who maintains the champions of
Truth by destroying the powers of falsehood," to indicate
Lord Krishna. The implied suggestions of these words
point at a bloodless murder of the blind old King!
With Sanjaya's words, the crowd of listeners and students
of Geeta are shifted from the field of the battle to the
palace of the battle-monger. This is perhaps necessary to
remind the readers that the philosophy of the Geeta has an
intimate practical application to life. Sanjaya informs
Dhritarashtra that the Great Lord of Yoga showed to
Arjuna his Supreme Ishwara-form. Sanjaya entertains a
thin hope that, at least on hearing that the Lord of the
Universe is on the side of his nephews, the blind King will
foresee the sure defeat of his sons and, in his
discrimination, will cry a halt to the impending disastrous
war.
IN A ROUGH OUTLINE SANJAYA DESCRIBES THE
LIST OF THINGS THAT WERE VISIBLE WITHIN THE
FRAMEWORK OF THE DIVINE CHARIOTEER:
798

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

10. With numerous mouths and eyes, with numerous wonderful
sights, with numerous divine ornaments, with numerous divine
weapons uplifted (such a form He showed).
11. Wearing divine garlands (necklaces) and apparel, anointed
with divine unguents, the All-wonderful, Resplendent, Endless,
facing all sides.
When a painter at his easel tries to express his artistic
ideas through the medium of colour he invariably begins
by outlining his theme roughly on the canvas. Later on,
inch by inch, he adds more and more details to make the
canvas sing the song of his message. Similarly in the
word-picture of the literary artist, Vyasa, this stanza
containing Sanjaya's words, represents the rough outline
of the Universal Form of the Lord.
The Vision appearing before Sanjaya is no vision for a
mortal intellect to live comfortably by. An ordinary man
must feel dazed with wonderment and fear at this august
and mighty Vision. The total Cosmos is no easy subjectmatter for the mind to conceive of or for the intellect to
comprehend, and therefore, when it comes as it does in
the Geeta, in the stark realism of the Vision, Sanjaya
stammers these phrases.
"DIVINE HIS GARLANDS AND ROBES" --- "DIVINE
THE PERFUME OF HIS ANOINTMENT" --- "ALL
MARVELLOUS, THE LORD, BOUNDLESS AND
799

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

FACING EVERY SIDE" --- these represent the remaining
strokes which, when added to the previous set of lines,
bring out the picture of the Cosmic-Man roughly in its full
outline.
CONTINUING IN HIS LANGUAGE OF DOTS AND
DASHES, SANJAYA DESCRIBES:
12. If the splendour of a thousand Suns was to blaze all at once
(simultaneously) in the sky, that would be like the splendour of
that Mighty Being (great soul).
After giving this hasty sketch of the Total-Form to the
blind King, Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya explains to him the
glory of the Mighty One. The Lord, in His Universalaspect, was dazzling in His own brilliance and the divine
glory of it was almost blinding; and this may be another
reason why more intimate details are not given by Sanjaya
in the previous two verses. In order to convey this idea,
Sanjaya is using this strange, but powerful, simile.
The glorious shine of that Mighty Being is almost, it is
said, as luminous as that of a thousand Suns if they were
to rise up all at once in the sky. In the Upanishadic lore
also, we have the description of the Atman almost in the
same language. But somehow or other, it must be
admitted that in the mouth of Sanjaya, especially when he
is describing the Divine-Form of Krishna, it gathers a new
glamour and glory.
800

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

BEAUTIFYING THE PICTURE WITH SOME MORE
DETAILS, SANJAYA ADDS:
13. There, in the body of the God of gods, the Pandava (Son of
Pandu) then saw the whole Universe resting in one, with all its
infinite parts.
In that Divine Form of the Lord, Arjuna perceived how
the entire world of manifold varieties had been brought
together and packed to rest at one and the same place. We
have already noticed that the concept of the Cosmic-Man
is the vision of the Universe through a mind which has
ceased to act with the concept of time or space. This vision
of "the many in one" is not so much a physical perception
as an intellectual comprehension. It is not that the
Universe has shrunk into the size of Krishna. It is quite
sufficient if Arjuna has the required sense of oneness in
the world of matter and if he looks at the Universe
through his understanding so that, intellectually, he can
come to estimate the oneness of the Universe.
To quote a parallel in modern science, we may consider
the attempt of Chemistry to classify all the existing
substances. When so many things in the world are
brought on the laboratory tables, it is found that they are
constituted of the elements, in all about one hundred and
three in number. This understanding of the elements soon
yields place when the atom-contents in them are
discovered to be nothing other than the electrons, protons
801

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and neutrons. If a scientist, who knows these three were to
look through his knowledge, at the manifold substances, it
would be very easy for him to see that all things of the
world are in the three factors, which are the contents of
each atom. If fact now there are only three elements in the
world, the triple factors in the Atom. Similarly here, when
Arjuna gained his special knowledge through the grace of
Krishna, he comes to recognise the whole Universe in the
very body of the God-principle, the Total-intellect.
ARJUNA'S
PSYCHOLOGICAL
AND
PHYSICAL
REACTIONS ON SEEING THIS FORM, ARE BEING
VERY CAREFULLY NOTED AND REPORTED BY
SANJAYA:
14. Then, Dhananjaya, filled with wonder, with his hair
standing on end, bowed down his head to the God and spoke
with joined palms.
On seeing this transcendental vision, emotions of
wonderment and consequent horripilations are noticed in
Arjuna. Though Sanjaya is far away, he not only seems to
see minute physical details of each soldier upon the battlefield but also seems to have a power to peep over the body
into the mind-and-intellect equipment of each individual.
The inner wonder-emotion in Arjuna's mind is as much
evident to Sanjaya, as was his hair standing on his body.
Arjuna, with folded palms, bending his head low, now
opens his mouth for the first time to talk. That Arjuna did
802

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

not speak so long is in itself a positive indication of the
choking emotion that he must have felt at the sight of this
sweetly unnerving Divine-Form.
WHAT WERE THE ACTUAL WORDS OF WONDERMENT THAT BURST OUT FROM ARJUNA? ... LISTEN:
Arjuna said: 15. I see all the gods, O God, in Your body, and
(also) hosts of various classes of beings. BRAHMA, the Lord of
Creation, seated on the Lotus, all the RISHIS and celestial
serpents.
When the Prince addressed Krishna as the Resplendent
(Deva), he is endorsing the comparison of the Lord to the
light of thousand-Suns which was used earlier by Sanjaya.
Enumerating the features recognised by him on the body
of Krishna, Arjuna says, "IN THY BODY I SEE ALL THE
DEVAS AND HOSTS OF ALL GRADES OF BEINGS."
This was already indicated by Sanjaya when he described
the Universal Form as 'WEARING NUMEROUS ROBES,'
'ADORNING ITSELF WITH DIFFERENT TYPES OF
DIVINE ORNAMENTS,' 'WEARING GARLANDS OF
CELESTIAL BEAUTY,' and bearing 'AN ARSENAL OF
WEAPONS IN ITS INNUMERABLE HANDS.'
These descriptions show that in Krishna one could
recognise not only the things of the world, but in the
Virata-form of the Lord even the Devas are represented.
The same adhidaiva-idea is very directly insisted upon by
803

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjuna in this stanza when he describes among the things
that he saw in Krishna, the Creator, Brahmaji
(Brahmaanam), the Annihilator, Shiva (Isham), and the
Sustainer, Vishnu (Kamal-asana-stham); along with a host
of ancient Seers!
AND CELESTIAL SERPENTS --- In poetry, it is a
technique, often very effective, employed by great poets
wherein they suddenly step down from the sublime to the
ridiculous or the grotesque, only to shock the readers and
thereby tap out of
them the degree of special attention which the theme
demands. It is indicated here that from Brahmaji in the
heavens, to the serpents in the holes of the earth, all are
represented in the Lord's Cosmic-Form. The microcosm
(Vyashti) is the macrocosm (Samashti). And this is
explained and realised by all great thinkers of the world.
But nobody has ever
before tried to express this philosophical idea in the form
of a vivid objective representation. Vyasa was the pioneer
in this art and none has yet dared to follow him in this
arduous task.
THE GRIPPING DETAILS THAT CAN UNNERVE EVEN
THE MOST COURAGEOUS ARE GIVEN OUT NOW BY
ARJUNA:

804

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

16. I see Thee of boundless form on every side, with manifold
arms, stomachs, mouths and eyes; neither the end, nor the
middle, nor also the beginning do I see; O, Lord of the Universe,
O, Cosmic-Form.
A limited human intellect is not the instrument with
which one can perceive in one sweep the Infinite majesty
of the Universal-Form. It must necessarily stand staggered
at the vastness of the concept and the significances of Its
sheer dimensions. That the Lord is the ONE dynamic
Truth behind every organ of activity and in every existent
thing is indicated here when Arjuna says "I SEE THEE OF
BOUNDLESS FORM ON EVERY SIDE, WITH
MANIFOLD ARMS, STOMACHS, MOUTHS AND EYES."
This is not to be construed as a caricature of Truth. This
warning is necessary for all hasty artists, who, inspired by
the theme, generally rush to this field of thought, to
represent this Cosmic Form with their brushes and
colours. And they all but fail miserably!
The Universal Oneness is not an object of perception; it is
only a fact to be realised or apprehended. This is endorsed
by the the very words of Arjuna that immediately follow
in the stanza, "NEITHER THE END, NOR THE
BEGINNING, NOR THE MIDDLE OF THEE DO I SEE."
The description of the Truth --- from which all names and
forms arise, in which they exist, and into which they all
merge back at the end of their temporary play --- cannot
be better done in any other way and those who, with
sympathetic understanding, get at the real import of these
805

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

stanzas can appreciate their rich beauties and luxurious
warmth.
The above stanzas express the oneness that threads
through the mortal beings and finite things of the world,
making a single garland of them all!
IT MAY BE DOUBTED WHETHER THE DEIFIED
DENIZENS OF THE DIVINE HIERARCHY ARE ALSO
REPRESENTED UPON THIS WONDER-FORM. THIS IS
ANSWERED IN THE FOLLOWING:
17. I see Thee with Crown, Club, and Discus; a mass of radiance
shining everywhere, very hard to look at, all round blazing like
burning fire and Sun, and incomprehensible.
Continuing his description of the Cosmic-Form, the
Pandava Prince gives more and more details of what he
comprehends
in
that
incomprehensible
Divine
extravaganza. He sees therein the Crown, the Club, and
the Discus. These are the insignia which Lord Vishnu is
said to carry, in all mythological descriptions.
Hindu gods are represented as having certain divine
symbols, and they all have their own respective special
significances --- of Kingship and Lordliness over the
world of finite things and happenings. He alone is the
Lord who is a Master-of-circumstances and a Ruler-ofimpulses. A slave to life and its enchantments is a
806

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

weakling, on whose head a crown rests only temporarily
like the gilted-cardboard-crown of an actor playing on a
stage. No authority or effectiveness in life is possible
unless the man-in-power has self-control and self-mastery.
No man can live a happy and mighty life unless he has
conquered his passions and crowned himself with
kingship over himself. He is Vishnu and He alone then
deserves the crown!
The four-armed Vishnu carries in his hands the Conch, the
Discus, the Club, and the Lotus. This is extremely
symbolical. In India the Lotus represents "peace and joy,
auspiciousness and happiness." The Conch blows and
calls man to duty; and if there be a generation of men who
listen not to the Higher-call in themselves, restlessness,
war, pestilence, famine, storms, and chaotic social and
communal disturbances visit them --- the Club descends
to hammer the generation to shape and discipline. Even
after this punishment, if there be a generation so totally
dissipated that it cannot improve, then comes the Discus -- the sharp-toothed wheel, ever revolving, the Whirling of
Time (Kaala-chakra) to annihilate the irredeemable
generation.
When we find these in Arjuna's description as part of the
Universal Form, it becomes evident that the same Truth is
the Substratum, not only of the lowest of low worms, but
even of the Divine Trinity. The Eternal Truth is one and
the same, everywhere, at all times; only Its manifestations
are varied, and the degree of Divinity sparkling from each
807

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

differs according to the grossness or subtlety of the
equipment through which the same Infinite Reality
expresses Itself.
AS A MASS OF RADIANCE SHINING EVERYWHERE,
ALL ROUND GLOWING LIKE THE BLAZING SUN
AND FIRE, HARD TO GAZE ON --- One of the most
expressive lines in this description, this brings home to us
the glory of Pure Awareness. This is not 'light' in the
physical sense of the term; but all the same we have to use
the word, borrowed from ordinary language, though it is
applied here with a special significance. Consciousness is
the 'Light' in which we so clearly 'SEE' our own thoughts
and emotions. It is the same light which, beaming out
through the eyes, throws 'light' upon the world and
illumines for us the FORMS AND SHAPES. The same
Consciousness, beaming out through the ears, with its
special 'light,' illumines SOUND, and so on. Naturally,
therefore, the Universal-Form of Krishna, representing in
Himself the Infinite Awareness, had to be described, in the
faltering language of Arjuna, as a mass of resplendent
light, blinding all faculties of perception, feeling and
understanding.
INCOMPREHENSIBLE (Aprameya) --- So far, though
Arjuna described, as best as he could, the Form, and the
feelings It had engendered in him, there is a streak of
despair running in these stanzas. Arjuna feels that he has
not captured the theme fully in the web of his language.
Language expresses that which is perceived, or felt, or
808

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

understood. Here is a form which Arjuna experiences. He
beholds. He feels. And he comprehends it in himself. Yet,
strangely enough, here is an experience that volatilises
and eludes all attempts at being bottled in language! He
seems to be not satisfied by the objective description
which he gave in the language of his eyes, ears, etc., and
he feels equally unhappy with the language of his
emotion, as felt by his mind.
True to himself, the wonder-struck mortal is trying to sing
the glory of what he lives, in the language of his intellect.
But even here he can only cry in despair, "OH LORD
THOU ART EVER INCOMPREHENSIBLE." Though the
universal Form is painted here by the author, in the
language of an "objective experience," he makes us
understand that the Truth is the SUBJECT and not an
object of even the intellect. The Self is the KNOWER, THE
FEELER, the PERCEIVER; It is not the perceived, the felt,
or the known.
FROM THIS VISION OF THE POWER OF YOGA, I
INFER:
18. You are the Imperishable, the Supreme Being worthy to be
known. You are the great treasure-house of this Universe. You
are the imperishable Protector of the Eternal DHARMA. In my
opinion, You are the Ancient PURUSHA.

809

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

From every experience, all intelligent men try to gather
their own conclusions, which alone, in fact, constitute true
knowledge. Arjuna had a great experience, too subtle for
words to express, or for his intellect to comprehend, in all
its entirety. But from what he saw, he tries to draw certain
conclusions. Crystallised into his understanding, the
conclusions are that the Power behind this Cosmic Form is
that which is the Imperishable Supreme Truth.
When we see all the waves playing on the surface of the
ocean, manifesting and disappearing after a temporary
existence into the very waters from which they rose, we
generally conclude that the ocean is the source of all
waves. It becomes at once the rest-house for the waves, or
the treasure-house for all the disturbances. Similarly,
Arjuna comes to the intelligent conclusion that Krishna, as
the Cosmic-Form, is the very Substratum from which the
pluralistic world of phenomena arises, exists in, and
merges into. The Universe (Vishwa) mentioned here, is not
merely the astronomers' universe of physical things, but,
in Vedanta, Vishwa is the sum-total experience of everyone,
gained through the individual instruments of perception,
feeling and understanding. The Lord is the foundation
(Nidhaanam) for the entire universe of disturbances,
experienced by us at our physical, mental and intellectual
levels.
Things that change can continue to do so only on a
changeless substratum. The world-of-change plays ever to
810

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the tune of Time and Space. But, in order that we may feel
a continuity of the happenings and thereby gain a
comprehensive experience of the total, there must be one
constant and changeless "Knowing-principle" that
registers the happenings, without itself in the least being
involved in the change. That truth is the Self, and the Self
alone is that which could take upon itself the stupendous
Universal-Form (Vishwaroopa). Keeping these ideas in
mind, Arjuna declares that He who has transformed
Himself into this Wonder-Form is the One Changeless
Truth, that permeates the entire realm of changes and
modifications.
In India, to the Hindus, the protector of his Dharma is not
a mortal king, or a priest class. The Supreme alone is its
guardian, for the Hindus are not the followers of any
accidental prophet, who has a fleeting historical reality
and a limited mission of serving his immediate generation
with the best he had. To the Hindu, THE ETERNAL
TRUTH
IS HIS GOAL, HIS MASTER AND HIS WAY. We demand
no mortal power with its poison-gas and atom-bomb to
protect our Dharma.
THAT YOU ARE THE ANCIENT PURUSHA, IS MY
OPINION --- In Vedanta, the very physical structure is
considered as a Capital-city with nine gates, each
controlled and guarded by its presiding deity. That which
dwells in the city, here meaning the body, is in Sanskrit
811

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

'Purusha.' In the context of the stanza, it only means that
the solution for the riddle of life, which is the source, or
substratum of the whole universe, is to be sought, not
among the world-of-objects but within the very layers of
personalities in us, until we discover it as the Purusha, the
Eternal. The Conscious Principle, which is the Spark-oflife in everyone, is here indicated to be the very Eternal
Truth which alone can take up the Form-Universal, as it
stands now in front of Arjuna's bewildered gaze.
MOREOVER:
19. I see You without beginning, middle, or end, infinite in
power, of endless arms, the sun and moon being Your eyes, the
burning fire Your mouth, heating the whole universe with Your
radiance.
Continuing the description of the Infinite as
comprehended by the subtle perception of Arjuna and
interpreted by his intellect in terms of the Universe of
things and names, it is explained, "I SEE THEE WITHOUT
BEGINNING, MIDDLE AND END, INFINITE IN
POWER, OF INFINITE ARMS." This pen-picture, drawn
by Vyasa with his eloquent poetry, gives a false
impression that the theme is an object, and many are the
artists who have tried to capture this form on the canvas.
The folly is clear to every intelligent student of Vedanta.
That which is Infinite, without beginning or end, cannot
be brought within the area of a limited canvas-piece. But,
812

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

at the same time, the phrase "OF INFINITE ARMS" tickles
the painter to express it through his own art. In fact, the
Universal-Form, standing out so clearly in relief work in
this transcendental apprehension of the author, can be
comprehended only by students of deep understanding
and developed intuition.
Here, by the term "OF INFINITE ARMS" it only means
that the Supreme Self, as the dynamic life, is the one
essential strength behind every hand that acts and
achieves.
The "principle of light" is the very "principle" in the eye. If
the eyes were not there, light itself would have no
meaning. At the same time, if the "principle of light" were
not blessing the objects of form, the instruments of
cognition --- the eyes --- could not have functioned at all.
We have here the description of the totality. The "principle
of vision," i.e., all the eyes in the whole universe, is
described as the pair-of-eyes, in the Universal-Form of the
Lord. Therefore, in the technical language of Vedanta, it
has been aptly described here that "THE SUN AND THE
MOON ARE YOUR EYES."
BURNING FIRE OF YOUR MOUTH --- Here fire has been
considered as the principle behind speech and the
principle governing taste. Warm food tastes better; frozenfood has no taste. The presiding deity of speech can FIRE
the generation. HEATED discussions always take place;
cold discussion is a painful monotony. Speeches that
813

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

freeze the audience are only lullabies. And the mouth
being the seat for both the instruments of speech and taste,
the mouth of the Vishwaroopa is explained here as "Fire."
HEATING THE WHOLE UNIVERSE WITH YOUR
RADIANCE --- The Self cannot but be luminous, because
Consciousness illumines all experiences, at all times, in all
living organisms. This light of Consciousness not only
illumines, but also imparts the Warmth of life to the entire
Universe. From the very statement it is evident that the
ancient Hindu had turned his gaze inward only when he
had exhausted his observations and study of the world
outside. It seems that he knew well that at a certain degree
of temperature alone life could continue on this globe;
below the required minimum and above the maximum
temperature, life would be extinct.
The light that is emanating from Truth is Its own light,
and not something which It has derived from any other
source. It is by "Your own Radiance" (Swa-Tejasa) that the
life is sustained in the world of names and forms.
20. This space between earth and the heavens and all the
quarters is filled by You alone; having seen this, Your wonderful
and terrible form, the three worlds are trembling with fear, O
great-souled Being.
Truth, as apprehended by Arjuna, pervades the entire
world-of-objects and even the concepts of time and space
814

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

are not independent of this Truth. The theme that has
been described here, we should not forget, is the Infinite,
the Eternal. Naturally, it is said here, "BY YOU ALONE,
THE SPACE BETWEEN HEAVEN AND EARTH AND
ALL
THE QUARTERS OF THE SKY, IS PERVADED."
The concept of universal oneness cannot be easily
grasped. The more one realises it, the more one gets
staggered at the immensity of it all. A limited intellect
cannot but shudder at the manifestation of such a vast and
majestic Truth.
SEEING THE MARVELLOUS AND THE AWFUL FORM,
ARJUNA SAYS, "THE WORLDS ARE TREMBLING." It is
psychologically true that each man sees the world as he
himself is. We look at the world through the windows of
our mind; as our mind is, so is the world to us. Arjuna felt
staggered and trembling in himself when he looked at the
world in that mental condition, and he could not but see
that the whole world was equally wonder-struck and
trembling as he himself was. Even while he is preoccupied
with the great theme in hand, Vyasa does not forget the
fundamental behaviour in man. These fine touches add a
glow of realism to this mystic picture of imcomparable
beauty and immeasurable depth.
ARJUNA HAD A DOUBT REGARDING THE
POSSIBILITIES OF SUCCESS IN THE WAR.* IN ORDER
815

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

TO REMOVE THIS, LORD KRISHNA NOW GIVES
ARJUNA A PEEP INTO THE FUTURE THAT IS IN
STORE FOR THE WORLD:
21. Verily, into You enter these hosts of DEVAS; some extol
You in fear with joined palms; "May it be well" thus saying,
bands of great RISHIS and SIDDHAS praise You with hymns
sublime.
The running commentary given out so long by Arjuna was
the description of a stagnant Cosmic-Form, at once
"marvellous and awful." Here we find Arjuna describing
the movements and actions that he observes in that
Cosmic-Form of the Lord. "THESE HOSTS OF DEITIES"
enter into and disappear in the Universal-Form. Shankara,
commenting upon the expression "HOSTS OF DEITIES,"
interprets it to mean the Duryodhana-fold. Though this
interpretation is not inconsistent with what is yet to
follow, it is true that this meaning is not the natural
interpretation of the terms used in the text.
If some, who are thus irredeemably drawn towards the
Lord's Form, disappear therein, others who are waiting
and watching the process are necessarily getting panicky
with fear. When man is threatened with a sure mishap,
and when he knows of no remedy or defence against it,
he, in his despair, always turns to prayer. This
psychological truth is beautifully brought out here, when
816

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

it explains how "SOME IN FEAR EXTOL THEE WITH
JOINED PALMS."
And this is not all. Bands of great Rishis and perfectedmen (Siddhas) who are not at all perturbed by the Vision of
the Totality, because of their super-human tranquillity and
inward peace arising from their own "wisdom," merely
sing sublime hymns of glory to the mighty appearance of
the total phenomenal world of multiplicity. They do so
wishing "MAY PEACE BE" to all, always. They realise in
their "wisdom" that the face of the cosmos assumes such a
terrible ferocity only when it has launched a wholesale
reconstruction scheme. The mean of wisdom also know
that nothing is lost in such a programme of "construction
through destruction." Therefore, they hail this process and
wish the world a brilliant golden era, which is sure to
follow immediately after such a total upheaval.
In this stanza, the entire world of phenomena has been
beautifully brought under three heads: the "Sub-normal,"
the "Normal," and the "Super-normal." The "Sub-normal"
unconsciously die away. They are the victims of the
process of death and they are so miserably unaware of the
very process, that they do not at all revolt against it. The
"Normal" dread when they intelligently observe and
become aware of the process of decay and death. They
become apprehensive of their own fate; and failing to
realise that nothing is lost by death, they, in their
ignorance, shudder at the inescapable lot of all living
names and forms.
817

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

There is yet another set constituted of "Super-normal"
men, who have sufficient apprehension of the Totality and
Its behaviour, and who are not at all perturbed even if
what is happening in the Universe everyday, were to visit
them also one day. When bubbles are broken, there is no
occasion to regret for those who know what they are and
how they are born. Similarly, when these Siddhas see the
upheaval that precedes a dying culture's reorientation,
they recognise therein the mighty Power of Truth and
wish only good luck and peace to the world so
reconstructed by the very hands of the Lord.
In whichever light we may observe this work, we must
come to realise how great a psychologist Vyasa himself
must have been and also how beautifully the knowledge
of the mental behaviour has been harnessed for
quickening the evolution of man to reach the fulfilment of
all his struggles.
HOW THEN DID THE GODS OF THE HEAVENS
REACT TO THIS SPECTACULAR VISION OF THE
COSMIC-MAN IN ACTION?
22. THE RUDRAS, ADITYAS, VASUS, SADHYAS,
VISHWE-DEVAS, THE TWO ASHWINS, MARUTS,
USHMAPAS AND HOSTS OF GANDHARVAS,
YAKSHAS, ASURAS AND SIDDHAS --- they are all looking
at you, all quite astonished.
818

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Continuing the description, Arjuna says that among the
hosts of being who gaze on at the Mysterious Form, there
are Deities who are all the Lords of the phenomena,
worshipped and revered by the generations of the Vedic
period. Even they, looking at the Universal Form, stand
struck with wonder and astonishment.
The terms used here have all been described during our
discourses on the previous chapters. The Spirits of
Destruction (Rudras), the Sun (Adityas), the Lord of the
seasons (Vasus), the Spirits of the Sky (Sadhyas), the Lesser
Lords (Vishwe-devas), the Horsemen Twins (Ashwins), the
Storm-Lords (Maruts), the Heat-drinkers (Ushmapas), the
hosts of Heavenly Musicians (Gandharvas), Yakshas, Asuras
and Siddhas --- these constitute the crowd that gaze at the
terrible form of the Lord, "ALL QUITE ASTOUNDED."
This stanza may not be quite appealing to us who are
today strangers to the conceptions which these terms
represent. But Arjuna was a student of the Vedas, and was
the child of the age; he was naturally well versed in these
Vedic thoughts and therefore the vocabulary of Arjuna
could not have been otherwise. We have only to watch for,
and understand, the general effect produced upon the
Pandava warrior by the Vision of the Totality and the
different reactions created in different types of minds.
Each, according to its own intrinsic capacity,
comprehended and appreciated the Vision of the entire
Universe, so crystallised into the definite shapeless shape.
819

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

GIVING MORE AND MORE SURE STROKES, ARJUNA
IS BRINGING OUT HIS EXPERIENCES TO A PRECISE
CONCEPTION UPON THE CANVAS OF HIS
LISTENER'S MIND:
23. Having seen Your immeasurable Form, with many mouths
and eyes, O Mighty-armed, with many arms, thighs, and feet,
with many stomachs and fearsome with many tusks, the worlds
are terrified and so too am I.
24. On seeing you, with Your Form touching the sky, flaming
in many colours, with mouths wide open, with large fiery eyes, I
am terrified at heart, and I find neither courage, nor peace, O
Vishnu!
The uncommon vision, "MARVELLOUS AND AWFUL,"
experienced by Arjuna, was not a localised form on a sixfooted Lord Krishna. It was, in fact, a manifestation, wide
and varied, extending almost to the frontiers of the Allpervading. And yet, the Pandava Prince realised it all in
his inward vision as a limited form, having a definite
shape. In the intellectual understanding of all shapeless
qualities (like freedom, love, nationality, etc.), one gives
them each a substantiality, a form, well-defined and
precisely outlined for one's own intellect, although never
for one's own sense-organs. Similarly, Arjuna too feels
that, the experience of the Universal-Form, though Allpervading, has for him a definite shape. But when he tries
to define the Form-Universal, so well realised by him, his
820

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

very expressions belie his own feelings and defeat his own
purpose.
Arjuna finds that the entire world is terrified by the Great
Grand Form representing in itself "MANY MOUTHS
AND EYES, MANY ARMS AND THIGHS, WITH MANY
STOMACHS, AND FEARSOME WITH MANY TUSKS."
He also adds, "SO AM I." Psychologically, when an
individual is in a crowd of excited people or in the
company of good men of peaceful contemplation, he
vicariously gathers unto himself the mental qualities of
the crowd in which he finds himself. "THE WORLD IS
TERRIFIED," and, Arjuna confesses, "I TOO AM."
At the same time, the Pandava Prince feels it insulting and
cowardly for his royal heart to feel any fear. Therefore,
justifying his own fear, he describes the Terrible-Form to
be in fact formless, and says that it absorbs into itself
everything. The Universal-Form touches the very skies
above. It glows with a variety of colours. Its fiery-eyes
glow. Its open mouths consume everything. Altogether,
the vision is capable of unnerving even the gods. Seeing
that 'Vision' Arjuna confesses, "MY HEART QUAKES,
AND I LOSE MY COURAGE AND MY PEACE." It is very
significant that it is in this condition of benumbing fear
that the great hero addresses the cosmic-vision, "O,
Vishnu."*
As I said in the beginning, the conception-form so clearly
defined in the intuitive understanding of Arjuna, is in fact
821

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Infinite described in terms of Its own endless
manifestations as the names and forms in the Universe.
We, the students of the Geeta, should never forget these
subtle under-currents of thought that Vyasa has so
secretly kept for the profit of all diligent and sincere
seekers of Truth.
ELABORATING HIS OWN SELF-EXPLANATIONS ON
WHY HEROIC HEARTS SHOULD TREMBLE IN FEAR,
THE PANDAVA PRINCE CONTINUES:
25. Having seen your mouths fearsome with tusks (blazing) like
PRALAYA fires, I know not the four quarters, nor do I find
peace; be gracious, O Lord of the DEVAS, O Abode of the
Universe.
"SEEING THE UNIVERSAL-MOUTH TERRIBLE WITH
TUSKS, THREATENING AS THE FIRE-OF-DELUGE,"
CONFESSES ARJUNA, "I HAVE LOST MY SENSE OF
DIRECTION AND I FEEL NO PEACE." This is the picture
of Time --- Time, the leveller of everything, the consumer
of all forms. When the intellect comes to comprehend such
a vast field, and that too all of a sudden, the very
magnitude of it smothers all powers of discrimination and
benumbs the individual for a moment. This chaotic
condition of confusion is expressed here, "I KNOW NOT
THE FOUR QUARTERS." And this is not all. "I FIND NO
PEACE" either.
822

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In such a condition of extreme wonderment, the
astounded mortal comes to realise that his physical might,
his mental capacities and his intellectual subtleties are all,
both individually and in their aggregate, unimportant
vehicles indeed. The little ego drops down its veil of
vanity and its armour of false strength, and stands naked
meekly surrendering itself to the influence of the CosmicPower. Prayer is the only resort of the individual, who has
thus fully realised the emptiness of his own hollow
vanities, in the presence of the Mighty-Total and the
Supreme-Divine.
In concluding the stanza with the humble prayer, "BE
GRACIOUS, O LORD, THOU ART THE HOME OF THE
UNIVERSE," Vyasa has rightly indicated that true prayers
can never rise up from a heart that is swollen with pride
and entertains an exaggerated sense of self-importance.
Only when man understands his own individual
insignificance, in the context of the total Universe, then
true prayer can rise up from him almost involuntarily.
THIS PARTICULAR SECTION (Starting from XI-21) IS
MAINLY FOR REASSURING ARJUNA OF THE
SUCCESS THAT IS YET TO COME IN THE FUTURE FOR
HIMSELF AND HIS ARMY. THEREFORE, THE LORD
DIRECTLY SHOWS THE FORCES ENTER THE
INESCAPABLE "MOUTH OF TIME" AND DISAPPEAR:

823

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

26. All the sons of Dhritarashtra with hosts of kings of the earth,
Bhishma, Drona and the son of a charioteer, Karna, with the
warrior chieftains of ours;
27. Into Your mouths, with terrible teeth, and fearful to behold,
they precipitately enter. Some are found sticking in the gaps
between the teeth with their heads crushed into pulp.
A philosophy that comprehends the totality without fear
or favour and is even true to its mission of seeking Truth,
cannot afford to ignore the DESTRUCTIVE-aspect in
nature. No creation is possible without being preceded by
the process of destruction of its own existence as the raw
material from which the created is produced. On the face
of the Universe also, wherever there is "existence" it is
nothing but a repetition of constant change, and change
can be interpreted either in terms of constant-creation
with regard to the MADE-PRODUCTS, or as a process of
constant-destruction with regard to the RAW-MATERIAL
that changed.
Thus, we see that in Hinduism, the daring Masters of the
Aryan fold, while extolling the beauty of the Reality,
indulged themselves in viewing It not only as the
Omniscient-Creator, or as the Omnipotent-Sustainer, but
also as the All-powerful-Devourer of all names and forms.
This may look dreadful to those creeds that have not yet
come to watch and analyse Life in its totality.

824

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjuna's words are significant. He does not see the
Universal-Form itself devouring the names and forms. On
the other hand, he observed that all names and forms
"ENTER IN HASTE INTO THY MOUTH." When we
watch an ocean, we do not find the ocean ever rising up to
absorb the waves, but the waves which have risen from
the ocean, after a momentary play upon the surface, rush
back to disappear into the very ocean. The multiplicity
that has risen from the Totality, after its play upon the
surface of Truth, must necessarily rush back in all hurry
into the very Whole from which they had arisen.
Arjuna watches "ALL THE SONS OF DHRITARASHTRA,
THE HOSTS OF KINGS, BHISHMA, DRONA, KARNA,
THE SON OF A CHARIOTEER, ALONG WITH THE
WARRIOR
CHIEFTAINS
OF
OURS"
entering
precipitately into the yawning mouth of the Principle of
Destruction in nature. This not only frightens Arjuna and
unnerves him, but also gives him a confidence to look
ahead --- in spite of the fact that in numerical strength, in
supplies, and in technicians, his own army was much
inferior to the mighty forces of the Kurus. The Vision
which he saw, was in fact a peep into the future. In the
Vishwaroopa, when the Lord expresses Himself as the
entire world of phenomena, a conception of oneness arises
in which not only space shrinks, but even Time becomes
an object-of-observation.
It is no wonder, therefore, that Arjuna saw in that picture
THE PAST MERGING WITH THE PRESENT AND
825

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

MOVING FORWARD TO MINGLE WITH THE ENTIRE
FUTURE. When I have the entire Geeta-book before me, I
can read either the preceding two pages or can skip over
them and read the third page ahead or, according to my
will and desire, continue reading this very same page.
Similarly, when the whole Universe is brought at once
within the compass of Arjuna's vision, he could see herein
at one gaze "ALL THE HERE AND THE THERE, AND
THE EVERYWHERE" --- so too THE PAST, THE
PRESENT AND THE FUTURE. The modern scientists also
have now come to realise and accept that Time and Space
are one and the same, and they are each expressed in
terms of the other.*
The seekers of Truth, themselves truthful, were not all all
afraid if their enquiry took them to the aspect of the
terrible in the Truth. The world is a combination of the
beautiful and the ugly, the good and the bad, the soft and
the hard, the sweet and the bitter. God, the Lord, has
Himself become all these, and therefore, no adoration of
the Lord, or estimate of the Reality, will be complete, if,
according to our taste, we recognise only the beautiful, the
good, the soft, and the sweet aspects of Him. An
unprejudiced and detached mind will have to recognise
Him as the ugly and the bad, the hard and the bitter also.
That philosophy alone is complete which points out that
the Supreme is, in fact, in Its Absolute Nature, beyond all
these qualities.

826

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In a purely scientific approach, therefore, Arjuna is made
to express all the details, even if they be blood-curdling
and gruesome. No doubt, the Geeta has its own sense of
realism. The mouth of death is described here with all
faithfulness
as "TERRIBLE WITH TUSKS," "FEARFUL TO BEHOLD."
HOW DO THEY ENTER THY MOUTH? ARJUNA SAYS:
28. Verily, as many torrents of rivers flow towards the ocean, so
these heroes in the world of men enter Your flaming mouths.
In this stanza, the analogy of the torrential rivers, gushing
ahead to reach the ocean and become one with it, is used.
Each river has, no doubt, its own distinct personality,
gathered from the nature and condition of the very terrain
through which it has flowed. At no point does any river
pause or hesitate to gush forward. An observer of limited
powers of understanding may say that each drop of water
in its flow in the river is moving towards a known point
down on its way; but, to a true observer, all rivers flow
towards the ocean and they cannot, and will not, stop
until they reach the ocean, having reached which, all
distinctions end.
Each drop of water in the river came from the ocean --- in
the form of a cloud it reached the mountains, and there in
the form of rain it manifested; watering the lands on the
827

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

banks and supplying life and nourishment to the fields,
they gushed down in their torrential haste to the very
basin from which they took off on this "MERCY FLIGHT."
Similarly, from the Totality, the individuals have come to
serve the race, to nourish the culture, to contribute to the
beauty of the world...and yet, on their pilgrimage none of
them can pause even for a moment en route. All must
rush towards the Source from which they arose. The river
loses nothing by reaching the ocean. Even though it
gathers enroute certain special qualities, and therefore, a
special name, and has, for itself, a separate tangible form,
it is all a temporary phase, a convenience taken up by "the
waters of the ocean" to make the dry land smile in plenty.
The more thought is given to it, the more can this stanza
yield its secret joys and expose its innate beauty.
WHY AND HOW DO THEY ENTER?
Arjuna says: 29. As moths rush hurriedly into a blazing fire for
their own destruction, so also these creatures hastily rush into
Your mouths of destruction.
The essential oneness between the MANIFEST that has
come out of the UNMANIFEST, and the very
UNMANIFEST which is the womb-of-manifestation, has
been beautifully brought out by the picture of the river,
which has risen from the ocean and is, in all haste, rushing
828

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

down only to lose its very name and form, and become
one with the ocean.
No analogy can be complete in itself. The picture of the
river does not show any intrinsic conscious effort on the
part of the river to reach the ocean. The living kingdom,
with its own free discrimination, it may be doubted, may
not act as the inert waters of the river. To show that even
the sentient beings are irresistibly drawn towards the
mouth of their own destruction, by the whipping hand of
instinct, the example of "THE MOTHS PRECIPITATELY
RUSHING INTO THE BLAZING FIRE TO PERISH" is
given. To Vyasa, the entire nature seems to be an open
book-of-scripture, explaining everywhere in all its
happenings, the fundamental facts that "the projection of
the unmanifest to the manifest-condition is the PROCESS
OF CREATION" and that "the manifest merging back to
its own heaven of the unmanifest is DESTRUCTION OR
DEATH." That terrible looking monstrous happening
called 'death,' when approached in a correct perspective
and with true understanding, unmasks itself to reveal a
gladdening face, ever cheerful and gay.
Arjuna's mental tension was mainly created by his hasty
evaluation of the enormous destruction he would be
causing in the battle-field of Kurukshetra. Krishna has to
cure him, by lifting him to heights from which he could
witness and realise, in one sweeping gaze, the
unavoidable phenomenon of death. A close and full
understanding of any happening removes the fangs from
829

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

its threatening hood! It is only when the discriminating
intellect of man becomes doped with "ignorance," that the
happenings around him can threaten to smother him
down. As the river hastens to the ocean, and the moths
into the fire, so too all names and forms must, and most
irresistibly do, rush towards the unmanifest. With this
realisation, anyone can thereafter face life, fearless of
death, since life itself becomes to him a process of
continuous change.
THEREFORE DEATH, AS A PLAY-OF-TIME, BECOMES
A STINGLESS PHENOMENON. THIS IS GLORIFIED IN
ALL ITS FEROCIOUS BEAUTY IN THE FOLLOWING
VERSES:
30. Devouring all worlds on every side with Your flaming
mouths, You are licking (in enjoyment). Your fierce rays, filling
the whole world with radiance, are burning, O Vishnu.
After composing some surging poetry, Vyasa faithfully
comes back to the line of thought he was developing
earlier. Hosts of men and things of the world reach the
Mouth to perish therein. The hungry Mouth is never tired,
for, the principle of destruction has a never-ending
appetite, and after "SWALLOWING ALL THE WORLD
ALL AROUND, YOU ARE LICKING YOUR LIPS,"
exclaims Arjuna.

830

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In fact, the stanza clearly brings forth the implication
underlying the concept of the Trinity. The Creator, the
Sustainer, and the Destroyer are three distinct entities in
concept, but in their actual workings, they constitute a
simultaneous process. Creation is continued in a chain of
destruction, and the process of destruction is not a total
annihilation but only a change from one form to another
thereby ending in a new Creation. "Constructive
destruction" is the secret philosophy behind the continuity
of existence observed everywhere.
In a cinema show, the various poses on the film are made
to run on in front of the arc-light, and each picture that has
passed away from the arc-light may be considered as
dead, and those reaching the arc-light as those that are
born. The continuity in these two series of happenings of
births and deaths, or constructions and destructions, gives
us the hallucination of a logical sequence in the theme
revealed on the screen. Conditioned by 'place and time,'
things and beings, happenings and circumstances, come
and go in the plane of our experiences and their continuity
is what we experience as "existence."
The above idea can be repeated in the language of our
traditional belief in the Trinity. Brahmaji, the Creator,
cannot create unless Shiva, the Destroyer, is functioning
simultaneously on the same anvil. And Vishnu, the
Sustainer, will never come to play unless the Creator and
the Destroyer work feverishly and consistently. The whole
world of multiplicity is thus an expression of Vishnu, the
831

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Sustainer, which is nothing other than the product of the
game played by both the Creator and the Destroyer!
When, with such depth of understanding, Arjuna looks at
the mighty resplendence of the Totality-Form, he feels
almost blindfolded by "THE FIERY RADIANCE OF ITS
FIERCE RAYS."
YOU ARE FEARSOME; THEREFORE:
31. Tell me, who You are, so fierce in form? Salutations to You,
O God Supreme; have mercy. I desire to know You, the Original
Being, I know not indeed Your purpose.
Arjuna realises suddenly the sanctity and the divinity of
the Lord's Power, and so, in a inspired rush of veneration,
he bows down to Him whom till now he took to be but a
cowherd boy of Vrindavana. Intellectual though he may
be, here is an experience too big for him to observe fully,
analyse carefully, and digest completely. The only thing
he can do is to surrender himself at the very feet of the
Lord, requesting Him, "TELL ME WHO YOU ARE."
To reinforce the solidity of the query, Arjuna indicates that
his question deserves an answer, for, "I DESIRE TO
KNOW THEE, O PRIMEVAL ONE." It is very well known
in the textbooks of spirituality, that "a burning aspiration
to know" is the motive force behind every seeker's mind
and intellect. But here Arjuna is preoccupied with the
832

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

problem of challenge that is facing him, and therefore, he
is not, in fact, directly seeking the Divine Truth behind the
Vision. His enquiry is highly coloured by the emotion of
fear in him and his anxiety to know what would be the
outcome of the war. This is clear from the last line wherein
he himself explains: Indeed I know not "YOUR
PURPOSE." The enquiry made here is "What is the
mission of the Lord in taking such a terrible form, and in
presenting Himself in front of Arjuna, exhibiting how the
Kaurava forces are marching in all hurry towards the
burning Mouth-of-Death?" When he intensely longs for a
thing to happen and when sure signs, forecasting his
success, present themselves, he needs a confirmation from
others. Here Arjuna is witnessing what he exactly wishes
should happen. But the Prince wants to get a confirmation
of the same from Krishna Himself. Hence this question.
INTRODUCING HIMSELF AS THE MANIFESTATION
OF TRUTH IN ITS ASPECT OF DESTRUCTION, THE
LORD IN THE UNIVERSAL FROM DECLARES:
The Blessed Lord said: 32. I am the mighty world-destroying
Time, now engaged in destroying the worlds. Even without
You, none of the warriors arrayed in hostile armies shall live.
No construction of a thing is possible without a
corresponding destruction of its own previous condition.
The world is created by a continuous process of
destruction. Today has arisen from the graves of
833

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

yesterday. Childhood dies before youth appears. And
when youth passes away, old age takes its birth. The
power visibly playing behind constructive destruction is
the fundamental Power that rules over and governs the
life of beings. Krishna introduces Himself here as "I AM
MIGHTY WORLD-DESTROYING TIME," who has
manifested to wipe out the generation that has suffered
decay in its own false sense-of-values and wrong
assumptions about life and its purpose.
The world-destroying attitude of the Lord is not at all
against His all-merciful concept. Sometimes there is mercy
in destruction. A broken bridge, a dilapidated dam, and
an ancient building are instances in point. To pull them
down is the most merciful act of charity that any
considerate government can do to the community; so too
here.
By declaring that the very purpose behind this
manifestation is to destroy totally the negative forces that
strangle the cultural life of the country, Krishna is
confirming Arjuna's vague hope that there is yet a chance
of victory for his army. Reassuring the very same idea, the
Universal-Form here declares that in the great mission of
reconstruction, the Lord is not depending upon any
individual or individuals. It is Time that is going to bring
the renaissance and achieve the revival. In such a colossal
movement of universal rehabilitation, individuals are but
mere creatures of destiny. In spite of them, and with or
without their co-operation, Time's plans will be worked
834

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

out. The country needs the revival; the world demands
man's rehabilitation. Krishna clearly says, "EVEN
WITHOUT YOU" none of the warriors manning the
secular folly of sheer materialism shall survive the war of
the imminent cultural upheaval.
In the context of the Mahabharata story, it almost amounts
to saying that the Kaurava forces have all been killed
already by Time, and that Arjuna, by co-operating and
servicing the Army of Renaissance, is only backing the
sure success.
THEREFORE, AS A REPRESENTATIVE MAN OF ALL
TIMES, ARJUNA IS ADVISED TO PERFORM FEARLESS
ACTION IN LIFE:
33. Therefore, stand up, and obtain fame. Conquer the enemies
and enjoy the flourishing kingdom. Verily by Myself they have
already been slain; be you a mere instrument, O left-handed
archer.
34. Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna, and other brave
warriors --- those have already been slain by Me; you do kill; be
not distressed with fear; fight and you shall conquer your
enemies in battle.
Here Lord Krishna is very directly consoling Arjuna that
he should stand up and catch the Time and claim success
and glory. Whatever be the might and strength of the
835

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

negative forces, the all-consuming Might-of-Change has
already destroyed them all, and Arjuna has only to come
forward, act the part of a hero and claim the crown of
victory all to himself: "I HAVE ALREADY SLAIN THEM,
BE MERELY AN APPARENT CAUSE, YOU, O LEFTHANDED ARCHER."
In fact, to every thinking man, the truth is obvious that in
life, he is at best only an instrument in His hands. We are
not generally ready to accept this proposition, because, the
self-arrogating ego-sense in us will not easily retire so as
to allow the Divine in us to play out in all its omnipotence.
Everywhere, in all our activities, when we analyse each
one of our actions, we find that our actual contribution in
them all is a meagre share, compared to what nature has
applied, and what the unseen hand has achieved for us.
At best, we can only combine things that already exist,
and coax out of their own natural qualities and properties,
a certain result, and then claim vainly that we have
created something new.
The radio, the aeroplane, the roaring engines, the subtle
machinery, the wonder-drugs, in short, the entire "Brave
New World," and all its achievements in progress --- are
all nothing but the play of children in the lap of the Lord
who, in fact, is the One who has ordered and allowed us
to have electricity, iron, ether, air, etc., with their special
properties. Without these, no achievement is ever
possible; and achievements are nothing but intelligent acts
836

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of the assembling and reassembling of these very Godgiven things.
The concept of self-surrender and the theory of serving
the world in constant awareness of the Lord, are not idle
dreams prescribed for escaping the gross realities of the
world. It is essential for man to raise his calibre and
temper so as to work efficiently and achieve success in the
world. It is the technique of keeping oneself constantly in
a mood of tireless enthusiasm and joyous inspiration.
The world is too much with the ego. To the extent the ego
is surrendered in the awareness of the greater and the
nobler, to that extent, the entire world and achievements
therein become a game of simple and sure success
everywhere. Earlier in the Geeta, it was, at many points,
strictly pointed out that through the technique of selfsurrender, the greater possibilities can be milked out of us.
The same idea is again repeated here. The entire army has
been invited here only to play the part of the hero --- serve
as His Instruments and let them claim for themselves the
crown and the glory as their wages.
Arjuna had certain reasons why he should be particularly
afraid of some of the top men in the Kaurava forces. They
are taken up one by one and the Lord indicates how even
they have already been killed by the All-consuming TimeSpirit.

837

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Drona was Arjuna's teacher who taught him the art of
archery. The Acharya had with him some special weapons
and he was particularly revered and respected by Arjuna.
The grandsire Bhishma had his death at his command,
and he too had very powerful celestial weapons. Once in
the past Bhishma had made Parashurama lick the ground.
Jayadratha was invincible; for, his father who was
engaged in tapas, had firmly resolved that "whoever
causes my son's head to drop down on earth, his head too
shall fall." Karna also had a powerful missile given to him
by Indra. It becomes clear now why these four names are
particularly enumerated by the Lord in the list of
personalities that Time had already devastated. Even
these great warriors have been eliminated by the
Principle-of-Destruction, and thereby, it has been brought
home to Arjuna that the field is clear for him to play his
part and advance towards the throne and crown, and
claim the entire glory is his own.
IT IS NATURAL THAT, WHEN A BURNING DESIRE IN
AN INDIVIDUAL IS FULFILLED, HE SUDDENLY
BURSTS INTO AN IRRESISTIBLE GLORIFICATION OF
HIS KINDLY PATRON:
Sanjaya said: 35. Having heard that speech of Keshava
(Krishna), the crowned-one (Arjuna), with joined palms,
trembling and prostrating himself, again addressed Krishna, in
a choked voice, bowing down, overwhelmed with fear.
838

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The dramatist in Vyasa, with his innate craftsmanship,
lifts the scene from the battle front to the quiet and silent
chambers of the palace, where the blind Dhritarashtra is
listening to 'the running commentary' given by Sanjaya. In
thus lifting the reader more than once* away from the
awe-inspiring atmosphere of Kurukshetra, Vyasa is not
only adding dynamic movement to the picture but also
giving a necesary psychological rest for the reader's mind
from such a subtle theme of awful beauty.
It is not to be forgotten at all that Sanjaya in the Geeta is
"OUR OWN SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT," who is fully
sympathetic with the righteous cause of the Pandavas.
Naturally, therefore, as soon as he reports the Lord's own
words --- that all the mighty men of the times, who are the
top-ranking men in position in the Kaurava forces, have
already been annihilated --- he wants to bring to the blind
old man's awareness, the magnitude of the impending
disaster. As we have noticed earlier, the only one who
could call the war off, even at this moment, is
Dhritarashtra himself. And Sanjaya is very anxious to see
that the war is not fought. Thus, we see here, in the stanza,
in the very language used, the motive of the reporter.
HAVING HEARD THE WORDS OF KESHAVA,
ARJUNA, THE CROWNED-ONE, WITH FOLDED
PALMS AND TREMBLING WITH FEAR, ADDRESSED
AGAIN --- The very language used and the picture
drawn, reflect the mind of the reporter. Suddenly, Arjuna
is called here as "the crowned-one," perhaps, as a bold
839

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

forecast, by which Sanjaya expects Dhritarashtra to see the
folly of the disastrous war. But a blind man can never SEE
things, and much less if he is intellectually blind with
delusion.
If the good sense of the blind king cannot be invoked
because of his extremely deluded love for his children,
Sanjaya expects to give a psychological treatment to the
royal father. A lengthy description of how others are
getting frightened is a sure method of spreading panic
even among moderately courageous listeners. If Arjuna,
the warrior, the bosom friend of Krishna is "TREMBLING
AND ADDRESSING THE LORD IN A CHOCKED
VOICE, OVER-WHELMED WITH FEAR," Sanjaya expects
every sensible man to realise the horrors of the war that is
imminent, and the dire consequences that are in store for
the vanquished. Even these words of Sanjaya have no
effect upon Dhritarashtra who is blind to everything
except his mad affection for his own children.
ARJUNA APOSTROPHIZES THE UNIVERSAL-FORM:
Arjuna said: 36. It is but meet, O Hrishikesha (Krishna), that
the world delights and rejoices in Thy praise; RAKSHASAS fly
in fear to all quarters, and all hosts of SIDDHAS bow to Thee.
Again from the luxurious chambers of riches and
splendour, the students of the Geeta are lifted, on the
lyrical charm of the poem, to the humming ground of the
840

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

battle-field and to the Wonder-Form of the Lord. The
picture of Arjuna addressing the Lord with his hands
folded, trembling with fear, singing songs of adoration,
with a throat chocked with fear and wonderment is
effectively drawn. This passage, containing the following
ELEVEN stanzas, represents one of the most beautiful
prayers that we have in Hinduism. In fact, the words and
the ideas expressed hereunder are so general in their
import and significance that we can almost say that no
better Universal Prayer can ever be conceived of, either in
its concept, beauty, or cadence, or in the depth of the
message in its words.
In these passages, the cognising power in Arjuna is
steadily realising the diviner Truth behind the details of
that Total-Form. When one watches and sees one's own
reflection in a mirror, it is rarely that the observer sees the
mirror-surface. When one watches the surface of the
mirror, the reflection is either not at all available or, at best
is only dimly recognised. So long as Arjuna is preoccupied
with the details of the Universal-Form, he does not realise,
or recognise, the Infinite which is the very core of the
Vishwaroopa. In these passages, it is evident that Arjuna
has started sensing the deeper meaning that lies behind
the cosmic wonder represented to him in his vision
Divine.
37. And why should they not, O Great-souled One, bow to Thee,
greater (than all else), the Primal Cause even of Brahma, O
841

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Infinite Being, O Lord of Lords, O Abode of the Universe, You
are the Imperishable, that which is beyond both the Manifest and
the Unmanifest.
WHY SHOULD THEY NOT BOW DOWN TO THE
GREAT ONE --- Because the Lord as the Primal Cause of
even the Creator, who creates the entire universe of
multiplicity, is like the mud in all mud-pots, or the gold in
all gold ornaments. The ornaments or the pots have no
existence at all apart from the gold-essence or the mudessence in them. Thus, the Primal Cause is that which
pervades everything and is that which holds together all
names and forms. Infinite in nature, the Lord is not only
the Universe, but he is the Lord of all Lords, inasmuch as
even the denizens of the heavens and the great
phenomenal powers --- all derive their individual might
from the Source of all Powers, this Infinite Truth.
The entire world of things-and-beings that exist, can fall
under two categories: the Manifest (sat) and the
Unmanifest (asat). The manifest is that which can become
objects of experience for the organs-of-perception, for the
instrument-of-feeling and the equipment-of-thought. The
Unmanifest is that which causes the perceptions, feelings,
and thoughts. These subtle causes that order the
individuals to live in the world outside, are called vasanas
and these constitute the Unmanifest. Arjuna's beautiful
definition of the Lord accepts that the Lord is not only the
Manifest (sat), but the Unmanifest (asat) as well. And He is
also that which transcends them both.
842

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

AND THAT WHICH IS BEYOND THEM --- In the theatre
we can enjoy both tragedy and comedy, but the light that
illumines the stage is that which transcends them both.
The wedding-ring is, no doubt, made of gold; the
wedding-necklace is also, no doubt, made of gold. But
gold cannot be defined as the necklace or the ring. We will
have to say that gold is not only the ring or the necklace
but also that which transcend them both. In this sense, the
Lord, being the essential Truth in all names and forms, is
both the Manifest and the Unmanifest, and He also has a
status that transcends both these conditions. In fact, that
which makes both the Manifest and the Unmanifest
possible is the Light of Awareness, the Pure
Consciousness, the Universal Lord, whom Arjuna is
invoking here.
THESE FEW STANZAS* REPRESENT THE MOST
UNIVERSAL PRAYER THAT WE HAVE IN ALL THE
RELIGIOUS LITERATURE OF THE WORLD. THERE
CANNOT BE ANY CREED OR CASTE WHICH HAS
ANY OBJECTION TO THESE, INASMUCH AS THEY
SUMMARISE THE ENTIRE GALAXY OF PHILOSOPHIC
THOUGHTS REGARDING THE ETERNAL, AND
EXPAND WITH THEM THE DEVOTEE'S HEART
WHICH CAN REACH DIMENSIONS ALMOST
UNKNOWABLE,
YET
WITHIN
A
DEVOTEE'S
EXPERIENCE. ARJUNA EXTOLS THE LORD THUS:

843

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

38. You are the Primal God, the Ancient PURUSHA; You are
the Supreme Refuge of this universe. You are the knower, the
knowable, and the Abode-Supreme. By Thee is the universe
pervaded, O Being of Infinite forms.
YOU ARE THE PRIMAL GOD --- The Self is the Supreme
Creator. The Pure Consciousness is the womb from which
even the Creator has risen. The Self, conditioned by Its
own creative urge, plays the part of the Creator.
YOU ARE THE SUPREME ABODE OF THE UNIVERSE -- The entire Vishwa is housed in the Lord, and therefore, it
is said that the Lord is the Abode for the Universe. Here,
the term Vishwa is to be correctly understood. When this is
translated as the "Universe," we are apt to confuse it with
the astronomers' universe or the scientists' universe. The
Sanskrit term Vishwa includes these and even more. It
includes the entire world of perceptions and the whole
field of emotions and the total realms of thought that we,
as intelligent individuals, experience in all our lives. This
totality of the world of experience through the body, mind
and intellect together is indicated by the term Vishwa.
With this understanding of the term Vishwa, it should not
be very difficult for the students of Vedanta to understand
the full meaning of this life. We are all now experiencing
our world through the matter equipments of our body,
mind and intellect. These, being products of inert matter,
have no Consciousness of their own except that which
they borrow from the Infinite, the Self.
844

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

These matter envelopments, we have already indicated,
are not produced from the Self, as the Self is changeless.
The world of matter cannot be said to arise from any other
independent source, since the Self is All-pervading and is
the One-without-a-second. Therefore, it is explained that
the Vishwa is but a superimposition upon the Truth, as the
ghost-vision gained on a post. In all such hallucinations,
the post is the abode of the ghost, of the emotions which it
creates, and of the thoughts it generates. There is no truth
in the ghost apart from the post from which it borrows its
ghost-form. Thus, it is the Self that is indicated here by
Arjuna when he so beautifully sings that the Lord is the
"Supreme Abode" of the entire Vishwa.
THOU ART THE KNOWER AND THE KNOWABLE --The Awareness in us is the Factor that completes all our
experiences as realities. If the Light of Awareness were not
to illumine the inert world-of-matter, no knowledge
would have been possible, and therefore, the Principle of
Consciousness, represented here as Lord Krishna, the
Charioteer --- is described here as the Knower. All the
techniques of Self-realisation are methods of gathering our
Consciousness from all its channels of dissipation, so that,
in the still moments of thoughtless Awareness, the Self is
automatically RECOGNISED. It is thus said 'the
Knowable,' or the realisable.
YOU PERVADE THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE OF FORMS --Just as sweetness pervades all chocolates, as the ocean
pervades all waves, the Lord, being the essence, pervades
845

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

everything. It was said just a little before, that the superimpositions cannot exist apart from the Substratum upon
which they are being perceived. The Self is the Substratum
on which the multitude of the world-of-plurality is
visualised, and therefore, it is rightly said that "HE
PERVADES ALL." This is only a repetition of the great
Upanishadic Truth that "the Infinite pervades all, and
nothing pervades It."
39. You are VAYU, YAMA, AGNI, VARUNA, the Moon,
PRAJAPATI, and the great-grandfather of all. Salutations!
Salutations unto You a thousand times, and again salutations
unto You!
So far Arjuna was chanting the glories of the God in His
transcendental form. A devotee (Upasaka) may wonder
what exactly the relationship of the Supreme with his
particular Lord-of-the-heart (Upasya) is. The forms and
names of Deities conceived of, and fervently prayed to in
ancient times, are generally representations of the
manifested phenomenal powers.
In the Vedic period, Vayu (the Wind), Yama (the
Destroyer), Agni (the Fire), Varuna (the Sea-god),
Shashanka (the Moon)* and Prajapati (The Creator) were
considered as Deities for reverence and devotion,
concentration and growth of the seeker's inner
personality. These gods were involved in those days
through chantings and worship, through rituals and
846

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sacrifices, and therefore, they were the only popular
concepts of God even in the minds of the educated.
Oftentimes and everywhere, "means" have a tendency to
get misunderstood as the very "goal." Arjuna, here in his
true understanding, indicates the Infinite, the Source of all
potentialities, the Lord, as nothing other than Krishna, the
Infinite.
That the Supreme Lord, in fact, expressing through
various functions, Himself plays the part of these Deities,
is an acceptable view from the standpoint of Vedanta. In
our own times it is usual for the devotees to invoke the
Lord and assert that 'the Lord of their heart' is the Lord of
all Lords. To this Lord of all Lords, Arjuna prostrates.
40. Salutations to You, before and behind! Salutations to You
on every side! O All! You, Infinite in Power, and Infinite in
Prowess, pervade all; wherefore You are the All.
The Supreme dwells everywhere within, without, above,
below and around, and there is no place where He is not.
This is not an original idea at all. This has been the
constant state of actual experience of all the great Rishis of
the Upanishads.
The Lord, to whom Arjuna thus mentally prostrates from
all sides, is not only the All-pervading Essence like space
in the Universe, but is also the "womb" from which all
power and daring flow out. Wherever there is an incentive
847

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

to act, or a capacity to achieve, it is all a ray of His infinite
potentiality. The Supreme as Pure Existence dwells
everywhere, in everything and in all beings. Since nothing
can exist without Existence, He, as Pure Existence,
penetrates all, and in fact He alone is the All. Ocean alone
is all the waves; mud alone is all the mud-pots.
I HAVE BEEN A SINNER DUE TO LACK OF 'RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE' OF THY GREATNESS, AND SO VERY
MUCH LIVED FOOLISHLY IN THE PAST. THEREFORE:
41. Whatever I have rashly said from carelessness or love,
addressing You as "O Krishna, O Yadava, O friend," and
regarding You merely as a friend, unknowing of this greatness
of Yours ... ,
42. In whatever way I may have insulted You for the sake of fun,
while at play, reposing or sitting, or at meals, when alone (with
You), O Achyuta, or in company --- that, O Immeasurable One,
I implore You to forgive.
Here are two beautiful stanzas that bring to the forefront
with dramatic precision, the exact type of emotions that
will naturally be generated in any ordinary man, when he
suddenly realises the Glory of the Divine. Till now, Arjuna
had thought Lord Krishna to be nothing more than an
intelligent cowherd boy, whom he had graciously
patronised so long with his royal friendship. And with the
realisation and recognition of Krishna the Infinite, the
848

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mortal in Arjuna prostrates in all loyalty and adoration
and pleads for His Divine mercy and forgiveness.
There is a very intimate personal touch in these two
stanzas wherein the philosophical discussions are
tempered with the emotional touch of deep intimacy. The
very effect of the Geeta is to bring the sonorous truths of
the Vedas and the Upanishads to the happy tune of the
work-a-day world. Great and thought-provoking Vedantic
truths have been suddenly brought down to the easy
familiarity of a drawing-room-chat by such frequent
psychological touches given by Vyasa's masterly pen. As
an intimate friend, Arjuna must have, in rashness, not
knowing Krishna's real Divine Nature, called Him
familiarly by His pet names.
FOR:
43. You are the Father of this world, moving and unmoving.
You are to be adored by this world. You are the greatest GURU,
(for) there exists none who is equal to You; how can there be
then another, superior to You in the three worlds, O Being of
unequalled power?
Here we find that Arjuna, bursting under the pressure of
his voiceless emotion and his great regard for the Lord,
addresses him: "THOU ART THE FATHER OF THE
WHOLE WORLD CONSTITUTED OF THE MOVING
AND THE UNMOVING." No doubt, the three worlds --849

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

consisting of our experiences in waking, dream, and deepsleep states --- are the interpretations of the same Eternal
from the levels of the gross, the subtle and the causal
bodies, and the Truth that illumines those experiences is
everywhere one and the same.
NATURALLY, THE LORD IS, AS ARJUNA SAYS, "OF
UNEQUALLED GREATNESS," AND THERE IS NONE
"SUPERIOR TO THEE IN THE THREE WORLDS."
BECAUSE IT IS SO:
44. Therefore, bowing down, prostrating my body, I crave your
forgiveness, adorable Lord. As a father forgiveth his son, a friend
his friend, a lover his beloved, even so should You forgive me, O
DEVA.
Arjuna seems to discover in himself a greater eloquence
and a subtler ability to argue logically, with the realisation
that he is in the presence of the Almighty, the Blessed.
Prostration, in Hinduism, though generally practised as a
physical act of touching-the-feet of the revered, is a
significant act that is to be actually accomplished in our
heart as a special inward attitude. Surrendering ourselves,
so that we may rise above ourselves into the spiritual
fields, is true prostration. The ego and ego-centric vagaries
arising out of our false identifications with matter vestures
have robbed us of our experience of the Divinity which is
already in us. To the extent the misconceptions are
annihilated, we, without these over-growths, are sure to
850

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

realise the serener beauty of the Divine, which in reality,
we are. In surrendering the ego unto the Lord, in fact, we
have to bring to His feet nothing but a dirty bundle of
animal vasanas, putrified in our own stupidity and lust!
Naturally, a devotee, reaching the feet of the Lord in a
spirit of surrender and love, has to apologise for the filth
that has been offered, as the only tribute of his love, at His
Divine feet.
Arjuna is pleading here with the Lord to bear with him as
"a father would with his son," as "a friend with his friend,"
as "a lover with his beloved." These three examples bring
within their embrace all the types of immodest crimes that
man, in his ignorance, can perpetrate against his Lord, the
Creator.
ARJUNA NOW PRAYS TO THE LORD TO RESUME HIS
USUAL FORM AND GIVE UP THE TERRIFYING
ASPECTS OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL AND THE
UNIVERSAL:
45. I am delighted, having seen what was never seen before; and
(yet) my mind is distressed with fear. Show me your previous
form only, O God; have mercy, O God of gods, O Abode of the
Universe.
Every devotee falls in love with the Lord of his devotion
and thus when, from the FORM he gets transcended to the
Infinite and Full nature of the FORMLESS, that was
851

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

represented so long by the FORM, he experiences, no
doubt, an Infinite Joy, but at that very moment he is
overtaken by the emotion of "fear." This is the experience
of every seeker during the days of his early attempts at
getting over the evil of spiritual 'ignorance.' The new
realm of joy lived within is, no doubt, absolutely blissful,
but a sudden sense of fear exiles him back to bodyconsciousness and the consequent mental agitation.
At the dawn of his experience Divine, the limited ego,
escaping all its limitations, enters into a world unknown
to it so far, and it experiences with all joy the vastness of
its own dynamism. Arjuna expresses his idea when he
says, "I AM DELIGHTED, HAVING SEEN WHAT WAS
UNSEEN BEFORE." But in the earlier attempts, a seeker is
not fit to maintain for long his equilibrium in that Divine
Realm, and his mind seemingly dissolved to enter the
STILL-MOMENT-OF-MEDITATION, revives again to
flutter into activity, and we find, almost always, that it is
the emotion of "fear" that the mind first experiences,
when, with a dreadful shudder it crystallizes itself to sink
into the welter of the body and its demands. At this time,
a devotee identifies himself with his own emotions of love
and devotion and implores the "Lord of his heart" to
manifest His own sportive form of smiles and softness, of
musical words and loving looks.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE FORM IN WHICH ARJUNA
WANTED THE LORD TO APPEAR BEFORE HIM, IS
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING:
852

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

46. I desire to see You as before, crowned, bearing a mace, with a
discus in hand, in Your Former Form only, having four arms, O
Thousand-armed, O Universal Form.
Arjuna makes an open confession here of what he actually
wishes. "I WISH TO SEE YOU AS BEFORE." He is afraid
of the Universal Form into which the Lord has expanded
to express His oneness with the essence in the entire
gross-world of matter.
When the Vedantic concept of Truth is thus experienced or
expressed in its universal majesty and grandeur, few have
the required intellectual stamina to conceive of the
Totality and adore It. Even at moments when the intellect
can handle such an idea, the heart of the devotee will
often fail to tune up its emotion to live the Absoluteexperience for long. From the mental zone, Truth can be
conceived of and enjoyed only through its symbols and
not directly in Its Total-grandeur.
Defining the Form of Vaasudeva in his mildermanifestation, Arjuna explains in this stanza the
traditional form of Vishnu, the Lord of the Bhagavata. The
concept of God as represented in the phenomena, has
been described in all Puranas, as having four hands. This
may look like a biological freak to students of physiology.
We are apt to forget that they are figurative
representations symbolising the concept of Truth.
853

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The four hands of the God-form represent the four facets
of the "inner-instrument" in man.*
The Lord Himself, the Self who wields these four hands is
represented everywhere as BLUE in colour, and clothed in
YELLOW. The significant hue of BLUE is the colour of the
Infinite, and the measureless always appears as BLUE, just
as the summer-sky or the deep-ocean. YELLOW is the
colour of the earth. Thus the Infinite, clothed in the finite,
playing the game of life through the four "innerinstruments" is the symbolism behind Lord Vishnu.
It is also interesting to note that the concept of God in
every religion is the same inasmuch as He is the Suprememost with every power and all knowledge. Man achieves
things by the strength of His hands, and the Lord, who is
all-powerful, can therefore be symbolised only by
showing that He has four hands. The four symbolical
instruments which the Lord is represented to carry in His
four hands are the club, the discus, the conch and the
lotus. The call of the Divine comes to everyone's bosom,
when He blows His CONCH, and if man were not to
listen to the call of the Higher dictates in himself, the
CLUB follows to punch him, and in spite of that, if man
continues his own mistakes, the DISCUS chops him down.
In case the roar of the "conch" is obeyed implicitly, then he
gains the LOTUS, a flower that represents, in Hinduism,
what the white-dove and the poppy-flower stand for in
Western tradition. Peace and prosperity are the
854

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

significance of "lotus" in
PERFECTION SPIRITUAL.

India.

Lotus

signifies

Arjuna, in short, wants the Lord to appear in his serenerForm and quieter-Attitude. For all early seekers and new
initiates in Vedanta, it naturally becomes difficult to keep,
in themselves, the same tempo for their philosophical
pursuits. At such moments of dissipation and drowsiness
of the intellect, the aspiring heart must discover some
reposeful resting-place wherein it can revive itself. This
bed-of-peace and tranquility, upon which the inner
personality of man can revive and grow into its fuller
stature, is the glorious Form of the Lord.
SEEING ARJUNA AFRAID, THE LORD WITHDREW HIS
UNIVERSAL FORM; AND CONSOLING ARJUNA WITH
HIS SWEET WORDS, HE SAID:
The Blessed Lord said: 47. Graciously by Me, O Arjuna, this
Supreme-Form has been shown to you by My own YOGApower --- Full of splendour, Primeval, Infinite, this UniversalForm of Mine has never been seen by any other than yourself .
Here we have the confession that it is not the privilege of
all devotees to come to perceive this "Form-tremendous"
and that Arjuna is enjoying It as a special favour due to
His Infinite Grace. He also asserts that, "THIS SPLENDID,
PRIMEVAL, INFINITE, UNIVERSAL-FORM OF MINE"
has not been seen by anyone else.
855

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It does not mean that Vyasa, the author of the Geeta, is
propounding a new theory, and is making the Lord of his
own creation testify to the veracity of it. It only means that
this intellectual realisation of the Universal-Oneness has
not been gained by anyone placed in the same
circumstances as those of Arjuna in the war-front.
Mentally shattered, physically worn-out, emotionally
upset --- the miserable condition of Arjuna and this
Arjuna-state of utter despondency are, in fact, far removed
from the favourable conditions for a single-pointed
intellectual quest, without which the underlying Principle
of Oneness in the multiplicity of the gross world, cannot
easily be comprehended. But Krishna had, due to his
tremendous powers, given the required 'eye-of-wisdom'
to Arjuna and made him realise, in a chance moment of
mental pause, the vision of the Cosmic Form.
WHAT WAS AT THE BACK OF THE MIND OF THE
LORD, WHEN HE EXPRESSED THIS STANZA, IS
CLEAR FROM THE FOLLOWING:
48. Neither by the study of the VEDAS and sacrifices, nor by
rituals, nor by severe austerities, can I be seen in this form in
the world of men by any other than yourself, O great hero
among the Kurus.
Explaining why Arjuna deserves a special congratulation
for having gained this extraordinary experience, the Lord
says that none can 'SEE' this Universal-Form merely
856

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

because of one's study of the Vedas, or on the strength of
one's sacrifices. Nor can one gain it by the merits gained
through the distribution of gifts, or through performing
rituals, or even through constant practice of severe
austerities. These are, no doubt, necessary and always
helpful in preparing the seeker to realise the essential
unity beneath the perceived plurality, but neither a mere
book-study, nor empty ritualism, nor physical tapas in
themselves will, as an effect of them, bring about this
understanding and the Final Experience. It can come only
when the mind is steady. This "Vision" can be illumined
only in the clear light of an integrated 'in-turned intellect.'
In thus making light of the study of the Vedas,
performance of sacrifices, distribution of gifts, practice of
rituals and a life of grim penance, Lord Krishna should
not be misunderstood as ridiculing these great
prescriptions of the Vedas. He merely means to say that
although these are means, preparatory to the final end,
they are not to be confused with the goal. Cooking, in
itself, cannot appease hunger, but that does not mean that
cooking is unnecessary; after cooking there is, and must
be, the eating. It is in this sense that we must understand
the stanza, criticising ponderous study and futile efforts of
misguided enthusiasts.
FOR, NONE OF THE KNOWN METHODS OF SELFDEVELOPMENT IS CAPABLE OF PRODUCING THIS
GLORIOUS ACHIEVEMENT. IT IS SAID:
857

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

49. Be not afraid, nor bewildered on seeing such a terrible-Form
of Mine as this; with your fear dispelled and with gladdened
heart, now behold again this Form of Mine.
Vyasa's dramatic genius will not fail to seek its fulfilment
whenever an occasion arises. Here is an artistic example of
such fine brush-work, accomplished by Vyasa with words,
on the canvas of the Geeta. Arjuna's emotional agitations
are dramatically indicated here when the Lord says, "BE
NOT AFRAID, NOR BEWILDERED, HAVING SEEN
THIS FORM OF MINE, SO TERRIBLE."
Krishna consoles his friend Arjuna by words and actions
and helps him to be in a state of reassuring joys. The Lord
comes back to His original form and announces His entry
into it with the words: "NOW SEE AGAIN THIS, MY
FORMER-FORM."
This passage, which announces the return of the Lord into
His "gentler attitude" and "loving form," should remind all
Vedantic students of at least one of the great Mahavakyas.
The identity between the Universal-Form, the TerribleTotality and the gentle Form-of-Krishna, the Divineindividual, is beautifully brought about by the term
"THIS MY FORMER-FORM." In fact, the microcosmic
representation of Truth smiling temporarily from an
assumed mortal-form of Krishna, is Itself the macrocosmic
Universal-Form, wherein He expresses Himself as the
858

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Essence in all forms and names. The wave is in essence,
the ocean; and if the ocean is mighty and fierce, terrible
and gigantic, the wave itself is tame and bashful, lovable
and attractive.
THE SCENE AGAIN SHIFTS FROM KURUKSHETRA
AND THE WAR-FRONT TO THE QUIET CHAMBERS
OF THE LUXURIOUS PALACE IN HASTINAPURA,
WHERE THE BLIND OLD DHRITARASHTRA IS
LISTENING TO THE RUNNING COMMENTARY
GIVEN BY HIS MINISTER, SANJAYA:
Sanjaya said: 50. Having thus spoken to Arjuna, Vaasudeva
again showed His own Form, and, the Great-souled One,
assuming His gentle Form, consoled him who was so terrified.
Sanjaya confirms here to the blind old king that the
terrible Universal-Form, after announcing Its intentions of
coming back again to its original sweet form had actually
accomplished that promise. What form Krishna re-entered
is evident: "THE VERY FORM IN WHICH HE WAS
BORN IN THE HOUSE OF VASUDEVA."* He assumed
the pleasant shape of Lord Krishna, the familiar friend of
Arjuna, the Blue-Boy of the Gopikas, and thus consoled the
mighty warrior, who was aghast with wonder, and
trembling with "fear."
In these words of Sanjaya, we also can notice the
minister's anxiety that Emperor Dhritarashtra should see
859

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the suggestion that the Lord of the Universe is Krishna,
and that Krishna is on the side of the Pandavas. But how
... how will a blind man ever see?
THE SCENE AGAIN SHIFTS TO THE WAR-FRONT
WHEN SANJAYA REPORTS THE WORDS OF ARJUNA
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
Arjuna said: 51. Having seen this, Thy gentle human-Form, O
Janardana, I am now composed and restored to my own nature.
Arjuna admits here that, when he sees the normal and the
gentle-Form of Lord Krishna, he feels relieved from his
inner tensions and agitations. When an unprepared
student like Arjuna is suddenly pushed forward on the
spiritual ladder and made to experience truths that are
transcendental, and too vast for his intellectual
comprehension, it is natural that even in that Realm-ofBliss, he feels giddy confusions and heaving sobs. Arjuna
admits: "I have now become collected in mind and am
restored to my normal nature, having seen the milder
aspect of Krishna's gracious human form."
TRUE DEVOTION TO THE UNIVERSAL FORM IS
EXPLAINED HEREUNDER:

860

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Blessed Lord said: 52. Very hard, indeed, it is to see this
Form of Mine which you have seen. Even the gods are ever
longing to behold this Form.
53. Neither by the VEDAS, nor by austerity, nor by gift, nor by
sacrifices can I be seen in this Form as you have seen Me (in
your present mental condition).
The Universal-Form of the Lord is no easy experience for
anyone, and it can be gained neither by study of the Vedas,
nor by austerities, nor by gifts, nor by a sacrifice. Even the
gods, the denizens of heaven, with their ampler intellects,
longer lives, and harder endeavours, are unable to behold
this Universal-Form, and they keep on longing for this
experience.
And yet, Krishna has shown this Form, mighty and
wondrous, to His friend through His Grace, as He Himself
admitted earlier.*
We may wonder what makes the Lord shower His grace
upon one, and not upon another. It CANNOT be a
haphazard distribution of an Omnipotent, who does
things as He likes, arbitrarily, without any rhyme or
reason! For, in that case the Lord will be accused of
partiality and arbitrariness.
HERE, IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA, WE GET THE
SCIENTIFIC EXPLANATION OF WHAT COMPELS THE
LORD TO SHOWER HIS SPECIAL FAVOURS UPON
861

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SOMEONE SOMETIMES, AND NOT UPON ALL AT
ALL TIMES:
54. But, by single-minded devotion, can I, of this Form, be
'known' and 'seen' in reality, and also 'entered' into, O
Parantapa (O scorcher of your foes)!
Regarding devotion Shankara says: "No doubt, of the
means available for liberating ourselves, the most
substantial hardware is Bhakti; and identifying ourselves
with the Self is called Bhakti."
Identification is the truest measure of Love. The devotee,
forgetting his own individual existence and, in his love,
identifying to become one with his beloved Lord, is the
culmination of Divine Love. The Vedantic student who is
the seeker of the Self, is spiritually obliged to renounced
all his abject identification with his matter vestures and to
discover his true nature to be the Self.
Only those who are thus capable of identifying themselves
with the One unifying Truth that holds together, in its
web-of-love, the plurality, can experience, "ME IN THIS
FASHION" --- in my Cosmic Form.
The three stages in which realisation of Truth comes to
man are indicated here when the Lord says, "TO KNOW,
TO SEE, AND TO ENTER." A definite intellectual
knowledge of the goal and the path is the beginning of a
862

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

seeker's pilgrimage --- TO KNOW. Next comes the
seeker's attempt to masticate the ideas intellectually
understood through his own personal reflections upon the
information which he has already gathered --- TO SEE.
Having thus 'known' and 'seen' the goal, thereafter, the
seeker, through a process of detachment from the false
and attachment to the Real, comes to experience the Truth
as no object other than himself --- TO ENTER. By the term
'entering,' it is also indicated that the fulfilled seeker
becomes the very essence of the sought. The dreamer,
suffering from the sorrows of the dream, ends it all, when
he no more sees, but "enters" the waking-state, himself to
become the waker.
HOW? ... I SHALL EXPLAIN, SAYS THE LORD AND
ADDS:
55. He who does actions for Me, who looks upon Me as the
Supreme, who is devoted to Me, who is free from attachment,
who bears enmity towards none, he comes to Me, O Pandava.
When he heard that anyone can, through undivided
devotion, not only recognise the cosmic might of the Lord
but also experience that glory in himself, the Pandava
Prince's face must have reflected an anxiety to acquire this
status. As an answer to this unasked question from
Arjuna, Krishna explains here how one can grow towards
this great fulfilment in life.
863

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Krishna-plan, for finite man to gain the stature and
strength of the Cosmic, seems to consist of five distinct
schemes. This is clear from the conditions required of a
seeker as given in this verse. They are: (1) whose work is
all dedicated to the Lord, (2) whose goal is the Lord, (3)
who is a devotee of the Lord, (4) who is free from all
attachments, and (5) who is devoid of all sense of enmity
towards everyone.
In these five schemes, we find the entire line of selfdiscipline summarised. Detachment from all activities,
whether physical or mental or intellectual can take place
only when one is constantly thinking of the Self. Enmity is
possible only when one considers the other as separate
from oneself. There cannot be enmity between my own
right hand and my left hand. The awareness of the
Oneness should be experienced through the vision of the
same Self everywhere and then alone can the total
avoidance of enmity with any creature be fully
accomplished.
Total detachment is an impossibility at the mind-andintellect level. The mind and intellect cannot live without
attaching themselves to some thing or being. Therefore,
the seeker, through God-dedicated activity, learns first to
withdraw all his attachments from other things, and then
to turn his mind with the fervour of devoted attachment
to the Lord. In accomplishing this, all the schemes
explained earlier are, indeed, very helpful.
864

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus, when the whole scheme is re-evaluated, we can find
in it a logic quite acceptable and perfectly psychological.
Each subsequent item in the scheme is beautifully
supported and nourished by the previous one. From the
stanza, it is evident that the spiritual seeker's great
pilgrimage starts with God-dedicated activities. Soon, that
God-principle Itself becomes his very goal in life. He will
develop, in himself, a consummate liking for this glorious
goal. Naturally, all his other finite attachments with the
world-of-objects will end, and at last, he will come to
contact the Self. Having become the Self, he recognises
himself everywhere, in everything, and so, in him there
cannot be any sense of enmity at all.
LOVE FOR ALL AND HATRED FOR NONE can be
considered the Geeta 'touch-stone' to know the quality of
realisation and intensity of experience a seeker has gained
through his Sadhana.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the eleventh
discourse ends titled: THE YOGA OF THE VISION OF THE
UNIVERSAL FORM
The Chapter is rightly named as the vision of the
Universal-Form. In Sanskrit scriptural terminology, it is
pointed out that the term Vishwa Roopa used here is
actually the Virata Roopa. The Self, identifying itself with
an 'individual physical body,' experiences the waking865

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

state happenings, and in this condition the Self is called in
Vedanta as Vishwa. When the same Self identifies Itself
with the total-physical-gross-bodies of the Universe, in
that condition the Self is called the Cosmic-Virata. Here
the Lord showed His Cosmic-Form but the Chapter is
titled as Vishwa-Roopa.
Om Om Om Om Om

866

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 12
Bhakti Yoga
The Yoga of Devotion
1. Those devotees who, eversteadfast, thus worship you, and also
those who worship the imperishable, the unmanifested --- which
of them are better versed in YOGA?
The philosophical discourses contained in the Divine
Song, though written in a conversational style, never
overlook the systematic development of its thoughts, not
only within the chapter but also from chapter to chapter.
The last chapter ended with an assurance from the Lord
that any seeker can realise the glory of the Cosmic-Form, if
only he can entertain an unwavering devotion. As a prince
of royal blood, Arjuna must have felt tickled by this great
challenge thrown at him. As a practical man of the world,
he enquires here as to the form on which he should
meditate.
The question is very intelligently put. It is quite wellknown that in the world there are two types of seekers,
seeking one and the same goal. Some meditate upon the
manifested-form of the Infinite and others contemplate
upon the unmanifested-Supreme. Both of them are
sincere; both progress onwards. But the question is as to
867

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

which, out of these two types of seekers, is better versed in
Yoga?
In philosophy, the unmanifest (avyakta) is that which is not
directly perceptible to the sense organs (indriya-agocaram).
The objects that can be brought within the perceptible
powers of our sense organs are called the manifested
(vyakta). Arjuna was taught in his early studies of the
Vedas that the Supreme was unmanifest and allpervading. But he had, in the previous chapter, a personal
experience of the Divine Cosmic-Form. Naturally, the
determined prince, seeking to understand the right Path of
spiritual evolution, asks here a pertinent question as to
who is the better seeker --- is it the one who devotes
himself in love to the Lord-manifest, or he who, with
complete detachment from all external stimuli, meditates
with ease and poise upon the unmanifested-Infinite?
The question expresses the great controversy that exists
even today in the world. Can the Lord be meditated upon
and realised ultimately through idol worship? Can any
symbol represent HIM? Can a wave represent the ocean?
EXPLAINING THE PATH OF MEDITATION ON A
FORM REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DIVINE, KRISHNA
THE INFINITE, STARTS HIS DISCOURSE.

868

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Blessed Lord said: 2. Those who, fixing their mind on Me,
worship Me, ever steadfast and endowed with supreme faith,
these, in my opinion, are the best in YOGA.
In this very opening stanza, Krishna points out three
conditions that are absolutely necessary in order that
devotion unto the Lord may yield its promised dividend.
Generally, there is a feeling that the 'Path-of-Devotion' is
very easy. It is equally true to say that no chosen 'Path' is
difficult for the seeker who has chosen it. 'Paths' are
different only because of the vehicles employed; in a boat
we can never travel through the grand-trunk road, nor can
we sail over the waves in a plane, nor on a cycle dash at
60-miles an hour! There are limitations to each vehicle. But
progress is assured to the intelligent and the careful even
with any such vehicle. Similarly, for self-development,
each type of seeker, according to the vehicle available,
chooses either the 'Path-of-Devotion' or the 'Path-ofAction' or the 'Path-of-Knowledge.' To each one of them,
his 'Path' is the easiest.
FIXING THEIR THOUGHTS ON ME --- Thought is the
content of our subtle body. Both the mind and intellect are
nothing but thoughts. It is not sufficient if they leisurely
wander around the concept of the Lord, but they have
actually to penetrate, delve into, merge, and ultimately
dissolve themselves to become the very ideal perfection
which the Lord represents. The word that is being used
here in the stanza (Aveshya) indicates not merely a
"THOUGHT CONTACT" but an actual "THOUGHT
869

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PENETRATION." In fact, human thought takes the form
of, gathers the fragrance of, and even puts on the glow of
the qualities in the objects of its contemplation. Thus,
when a devotee's thoughts gush forward in sincerity, in a
newly found urge of irrepressible love towards the Lord,
the devotee, as a personality, ends for the time being, and
himself acquires the glow and beauty of the Lord-of-hisheart.
EVER SELF-CONTROLLED, WORSHIP ME --- The
second condition necessary for a devotee to accomplish
his evolution through the 'Path-of-Devotion' is that he
must have sufficient balance in himself to exercise regular
self-control while worshipping the Lord. The mind, by its
very nature, will always try to run wild from its objects of
contemplation, and the art of keeping the thoughts
balanced at its point-of-concentration is called self-control.
The Sanskrit term Upasana though it can be translated as
'worship', should not be misunderstood by the superficial
suggestion that automatically comes to us when we hear
the word 'worship.' True Upasana is an inward act of
attunement with the Higher Principle so as to get
ourselves completely merged with It.
WITH SUPREME FAITH --- Faith is generally understood
as "blind belief"... blind belief is not Shraddha. Shraddha is
"MY BELEIF IN SOMETHING I DO NOT KNOW, SO
THAT I MAY COME TO KNOW WHAT I BELIEVE IN."
Without this faculty developed in him, a devotee may not
870

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

succeed sufficiently in bringing about a self-divinisation in
himself even after years of practice.
Thus, three main conditions are enumerated in this stanza
as essential and unavoidable for one to become a true
devotee, viz., (1) Perfect faith, (2) Ever steadfast in
worship and (3) One's mind totally merged with the
concept of the Lord. If these are accomplished in anyone,
he is considered as the most steadfast devotee by the Lord.
THEN, ARE NOT THE OTHERS YOGIS? "WAIT; HEAR
NOW WHAT I HAVE TO SAY REGARDING THEM":
3. Those who worship the imperishable, the indefinable, the
unmanifest, the omnipresent, the unthinkable. the
unchangeable. the immovable and the eternal, . . .
4. Having restrained all the senses, even-minded everywhere,
rejoicing ever in the welfare of all beings --- verily theyalso come
unto Me.
In the previous stanza, the essential conditions under
which alone a devotee can practice contemplation upon a
Manifest-Form of the Lord to become a steadfast Yogi
were described. In these two stanzas, Lord Krishna is
trying to describe those who meditate upon the
Unmanifest-Form of the Lord.

871

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IMPERISHABLE (Akshara) --- All those that have forms
and qualities are substances and all substances are
perishable. The Imperishable is, therefore, that which has
no qualities. Qualities alone can be perceived, and it
implies that it is impossible for the sense organs to
perceive the Imperishable.
INDEFINABLE (Anirdeshyam) --- Definitions are always in
terms of perceived experiences and when a thing is
imperceptible, naturally, it cannot be defined and
distinguished from other things.
ALL-PERVADING (sarvatra-gam) --- The Infinite that has
no qualities, that is not manifest, that which is, therefore,
Indefinable, should necessarily be All-pervading and
existing everywhere. If the Supreme can be indicated as
not existing in any place, then the Supreme will have a
particular shape. And that which has a shape will perish.
UNTHINKABLE (Achintyam) --- That which can be
conceived of by a human mind will immediately become
the object of feelings and thoughts and since all objects are
perishable, the Imperishable must necessarily be
Inconceivable, Incomprehensible, and Unthinkable.
UNCHANGING (Kootasthah) --- The Self, the
Consciousness, remains unchanged even though it is the
substratum on which all changes constantly take place. '
Koota' in Sanskrit, is an "anvil." Just as the iron block in a
smithy's workshop, without itself undergoing any change,
872

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

allows other pieces of iron to be beaten out on it, and
changed into any shape; so too, the Consciousness allows
our personalities to grow well or ill in contact with It.
IMMOVABLE (Achalam) --- Motion is change in the timespace system. A thing can never move in itself; it can do so
only to a point in space and time where it is not already.
Here, now, I remain in my chair. I can move to another
place to occupy it in the coming minute. But here and now
in my own chair, I cannot move in myself, since I pervade
the whole of me. The Infinite is All-pervading and there is
no point in space or time where It is not, and therefore, the
Infinite cannot move. It is here, there, everywhere; It has
the past, the present and the future IN it.
ETERNAL (Dhruvam) --- That which can change is a thing
that is conditioned by time and space. But the Supreme,
the Substratum of all, at all times and in all places, is the
One that supports the very play of time and space, and
therefore, these two factors cannot condition the Infinite.
Consciousness, which is the Infinite Self in us, is the same
everywhere and at all times --- in our childhood, youth
and old age, in all places and at all times --- and in all
conditions of joy and sorrow or success and failure. It is
only when we come down to the levels of our intellect,
mind, and body, that we step into Einstein's world with its
Relativity Theory in the play of time and space. The
Supreme is unconditioned by time; It is the ruler of time. It
is Eternal.
873

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

We must note that all these terms used here are
expressions borrowed from our Upanishads to indicate that
which provides the Eternal substratum for the everchanging universe of names and forms, behaviours and
happenings, perceptions and feelings, thoughts and
experiences. Meditation upon the Lord, symbolised-inthe-form, demands three unavoidable conditions.
HAVING RESTRAINED ALL THE SENSES --- To
dissipate our energies through the sense organs is the
vulgar hobby of the thoughtless mortal. A seeker, who is
aspiring to reach the summit of Perfection and rule over
the state of deathless joy, must necessarily curtail such
dissipations and redirect the energies so conserved for the
higher flight. The sense organs are the real gateways
through which the disturbing world of plurality steals in,
to storm our inner bosom and plunge us into destruction.
It is again through the organs-of-action that the mind
gushes out into the world-of-objects. These two
transactions break up our harmonious equipoise and
steady balance. Krishna rightly emphasizes here that, if a
meditator is to succeed in the 'Path-of-Meditation' he must
cultivate a habit of living with his senses in control.
ALWAYS EQUANIMOUS --- The second of the conditions
that has been prescribed here by the Lord for a successful
meditator is his intellectual equanimity in all conditions
and experiences. It is very foolish indeed for a thinker to
hope for a condition in life, wherein no disturbance from
the outer world can reach him to distract his meditation.
874

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Such a perfect condition is impossible. The things of the
world in themselves and in their patterns keep on
changing. In such a kaleidoscopic design of existence, it is
indeed unintelligent to expect any desirable system to
remain continuously for the benefit of a seeker's steady
practice. Such a thing is impossible. In the world-ofchange, therefore, a seeker must discover his own balance
and equipoise, by controlling his intellectual evaluations,
mental attachments and physical contacts with the world
outside.
The intelligent relationship maintained by a seeker
towards the world outside, whereby he experiences a
uniform steadiness in himself, in spite of the mad revelry
of things and beings around him, is called the condition of
equanimity. He, who has developed the right sense of
discrimination, can easily watch for and see the golden
chord of Beauty that holds together all that is enchanting
and grotesque constituting the outer world. This capacity
is called Sama-buddhi.
My child may be dirty at one moment, mischievous at
another; screaming in the morning, laughing in the noon;
bullying in the evening and wild at night! Yet, through all
such conditions, the father in me sees but one and the
same son, therefore, I give my love equally in all these
different manifestations of my own son. This is a loving
father's Sama-buddhi. In the same way, true seeker learns
to recognise the Lord-of-his-heart in grim tragedies, in the
pleasant comedies, in the tremendous successes, in the
875

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sighing sorrows and in the disappointing failures in his
own day-to-day life. Therefore, he becomes equanimous
intellectually.
INTENT ON THE WELFARE OF ALL BEINGS --Enumerating the third of the qualifications necessary for a
successful meditator, the Lord says that he should ever be
self-dedicated in serving at his best, to all beings. It is
impossible for anyone, as long as he is in the embodiment,
to give all his mind and intellect, at all times, towards the
higher contemplation. He must necessarily come in
contact with the world and react to it. In all such activities,
a seeker should be, by the very nature of his philosophy,
one who is ever devoted in tirelessly serving the entire
living kingdom. Love for all beings becomes his creed.
Thus, if the meditators, fixing their mind upon the
Imperishable, the Unmanifest, are able to control their
sense organs, keep themselves equanimous and make it
their nature to serve others, they too, "REACH ME
ALONE." Krishna declares that they too reach the same
goal, the Supreme Self.
The question as raised by Arjuna is rather of a
controversial nature, while Krishna's answer to it is a
declaration of an incontrovertible truth. Here, the great
divine philosopher points out how both the Paths take the
practitioner to one and the same goal, and the same
general rules of conduct in their dealing with the world
are here clearly prescribed for both of them. Whether the
876

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

devotee is seeking his spiritual unfoldment through
meditation upon a personal, or an impersonal God, the
result achieved, it is shown, remains the same, if the
disciplines required of him are all fully and faithfully
followed.
BUT, GENERALLY SPEAKING TO THE MAJORITY,
THE LORD ADDS:
5. Greater is their trouble whose minds are set on the
'Unmanifest' ; for the goal, the 'Unmanifest, ' is very hard for
the embodied to reach.
After explaining how the goal reached by all meditators is
one and the same Supreme Perfection, Lord Krishna tries
to compare the two incomparable 'Paths', both of equal
efficacy and merit. He says "GREATER IS THE TOIL OF
THOSE WHOSE THOUGHTS ARE FIXED ON THE
UNMANIFEST." This declaration, when read as such and
in itself, is not only an advocacy of the 'Path-of-Devotion'
to a PERSONAL GOD, but almost amounts to a positive
condemnation of meditation upon the Formless. Such an
erroneous and misleading interpretation will render the
Geeta a scripture that contradicts the 'eternal wisdom' of
the Upanishads. And yet, there are vocal champions of
devotion (Bhakti), who quote this half stanza to beguile the
faithful!

877

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The first line is commented upon and elucidated by the
following line in the stanza. Lord Krishna explains why it
is hard ordinarily for seekers to contemplate upon the
Formless. "THE UNMANIFEST IS VERY HARD INDEED
FOR THE EMBODIED TO REACH." The crucial word in
the stanza is 'embodied.' It is often very directly understood
to mean "all those who have a physical structure." The
absurdity of such an understanding would become
evident if we follow the natural corollary of such an
interpretation. If all those who are having a physical body
can meditate only upon the form of the Lord, then it
follows that pure meditation upon the Formless is to be
undertaken only after the body is dropped and the seeker
is dead.
Shri Shankaracharya, therefore, clearly explains that the
"EMBODIED" means "those who are attached to their
bodies." Sunk in flesh, if one personality lives only a life of
sensuality and satisfaction of one's body-cravings, one will
find it too difficult to take to steady and continuous
meditation upon the subtle theme of the Infinite, Formless
and All-pervading. An old man whose vision is lost and
whose hands are shaky, may find it very difficult to thread
a needle; so too, a mind and intellect agitated, panting and
restless, suffering from desire-plays, are not vehicles that
can successfully fly beyond the frontiers of names and
forms to the endless Spiritual Glory.
In short, to the majority of us, meditation upon the Lord,
as expressed in the Universe, is easier and more profitable.
878

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Man can worship the myriad forms through service
undertaken in a spirit of worship and divine dedication.
By doing so, the body-attachments and sense-appetites get
purged from his inner make-up and his mind ecomes
subtle enough to conceive and contemplate upon the
Formless and the Imperishable Unmanifest.
EVEN THOUGH, LATER ON, WE SHALL MEET
WITHIN THIS CHAPTER, THE WAY OF LIFE
PRESCRIBED FOR MEN CONTEMPLATING UPON THE
'MANIFEST, ' HEREUNDER WE SHALL FIND THE
DISCIPLINES IN LIFE FOR A STUDENT WHO IS
TRYING TO STEADY THE MIND THROUGH HIS
DEVOTION FOR THE 'MANIFEST-LORD':
6. But those who worship Me, renouncing all actions in Me,
regarding Me as the Supreme Goal, meditating on Me with
single-minded devotion (YOGA) . . .
7. For them, whose minds are set on Me, verily I become, erelong, O Partha, the Saviour, (to save them) out of the ocean of
finite experiences; the SAMSARA.
Here Krishna prescribes certain definite conditions to be
faithfully followed by all meditators upon the Form-ofthe-Lord, and concludes that those who are following His
instructions fully, will be saved from their mortal
limitations, by the Lord Himself, on whose Form they are
879

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

contemplating. A careful study of these conditions will
show us how the devotee grows mentally to stature so
divine and high that, thereafter he needs no help from
anyone at all. But, in the beginning, a seeker needs some
assurances from his teacher in order to instil in him the
required self-confidence to start his practices.
THOSE WHO WORSHIP ME, RENOUNCING ALL
ACTIONS IN ME --- To renounce all our actions to an
INSTITUTION, to an IDEA or to a POWER, is to end our
individual limitations and identify ourselves with that for
which we renounce. Thus, an ordinary man, as
ambassador of his country, becomes a mighty personality
in the foreign courts, because he talks, acts, thinks and
expresses the will of an entire people. Similarly, when a
devotee of the Infinite Lord surrenders himself totally at
His feet and acts as a messenger, or as a representative of
the Will of the Lord, he becomes, not only divinely
'dynamic,' but in and through his own activities, aware of
the presence and grace of the Universal Spirit.
REGARDING ME AS THE SUPREME GOAL --- A dancer
never forgets the rhythm of the drum which accompanies
her steps. A musician is ever conscious of the background
hum. Similarly, a devotee is advised not take up religion
as a part-time entertainment, or as a temporary escapism,
but to consider the Lord as the Supreme Goal to be
achieved in and through life. In short, we are advised that
in order to ascend to the Higher summits of cultural
perfection, it is necessary that we direct all our contacts,
880

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

transactions, and experiences in our life, towards the
achievement of this cumulative goal of Self-Perfection, as
symbolised in the Lord of our heart.
WITH UNSWERVING YOGA --- All attempts with which
we develop our mental attunement with any chosen State
of Perfection constitute Yoga. To lift our minds from its
present agitations and wasteful tendencies towards a
greater goal of ampler joy and fuller wisdom is Yoga. This
faculty of Yoga is in everyone of us. At all times we are
practising it. But the results of Yoga will depend upon the
goal towards which we are heaving forward;
unfortunately, ours is not generally a Divine Goal; to
strive for the sense-enjoyments is called Bhoga.
Ordinarily, our goal keeps on changing and we reach
nowhere even though our struggle is consistent. If a
holiday-maker has two spots in view, and he cannot come
to a decision as to which place he wants to visit, then he
can reach neither of them. He will be in a helpless state of
confusion, travelling up and down the road, reaching
nowhere, and wasting his time and energy. 'Anya' means
'other'; 'Ananya' means 'without otherness.' Krishna is
advising here Ananya Yoga, meaning a Yoga in which the
goal is ever steady and our mind has no sense of
'otherness' about it.
It may be noted here that mental disintegration can come
both because of the 'otherness' in our goal, and because of
881

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the mind wandering
preoccupations.

into

other

channels

of

Thus those (a) who have renounced all actions in Me (b)
who regard Me as the Supreme Goal and (c) who, with a
single-pointed mind and goal strive, are the best of My
devotees, when their striving is constituted of meditation
(Dhyana) and worship (Upasana). We have already
indicated that Upasana is not merely meditation upon a
goal, but becoming, in an active way, one with the Goal
contemplated upon. At-one-ment with the goal is the
meditator's aim and fulfilment.
Enumerating the conditions necessary for a devotee at his
seat of meditation, Krishna assures him that he need not
wonder how he will go beyond the shores of sorrows,
agitations, and imperfections, which are the lot of all
mortals. "I SHALL BE THEIR SAVIOUR" is a divine
assurance and an infinite guarantee. It is possible that
seekers may become rather impatient when even after
months and years of practice, they do not come anywhere
near any spiritual experience.
The Lord's assurance also indicates the time limit; He says
that He will save the seeker from his own imperfection
'ere-long' (nachirat).
TO THOSE WHOSE MIND IS SET ON ME --- The mind
generally takes the form of the object it contemplates
upon. When an integrated mind-intellect-equipment of a
882

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

devotee, through constant practice, gains the capacity of
engaging itself entirely on the concept of the Lord, to the
exclusion of all agitations and undivine thoughts, the
entire mind assumes the stature of the Infinite. It is the
mind that gives us the hallucination of our egocentric
limitations, and again, it is the mind that rediscovers the
Infinitude. Bondage and liberation are both for the mind.
The Self is ever free; ever liberated; never bound.
8. Fix your mind on Me only, place your intellect in Me; then,
(thereafter) you shall, no doubt, live in Me alone.
Meditation is not a physical act but it is a subtle art
developed by the inner personality in man. Every seeker
must be experiencing that what his intellect accepts, his
heart does not appreciate; and what his heart craves for,
the intellect laughs at. To bring both the head and the
heart to the same Enchanting Form of thrilled satisfaction,
would be the secret of harnessing the entire inner man to
the spiritual effort. The technique of this art is beautifully
explained in this stanza.
FIX THY MIND ON ME ALONE --- The mind cannot
contemplate on any theme that cannot be conditioned by
the senses. Therefore, by meditation upon the enchanting
form of the Immortal Flute-player, the human mind can
readily be made to rest entirely at the feet of the form. The
Lord, being all-pervading, is at once the Divine Grace
behind all names and forms. The mind of a devotee cannot
883

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

wander to any place where he is not reminded of the smile
of the Crowned Cowherd-boy!
Merely to ruminate over a decorated marble symbol of the
Eternal Child is not in itself sufficient food for the inner
personality of man. The intellectual aspect in us is starved,
although the heart nestles in satisfaction at the soft feet of
the Lord. Any over-development will bring about an ugly
situation; perfection is harmony and uniform growth.
Therefore, technically, the Geeta rightly advises that the
devotee must bring his discriminating intellect to pierce
through the stony idol and contact the pulsating Truth it
represents.
PLACE THE INTELLECT IN ME --- To contact thereby
the cosmic total-intellect which is the Lord's equipment.
Every one of us, at any given moment, is the sum-total of
what we think and what we feel. If our minds are resting
on the Lord and our intellects have dived into the very
depths of the Infinite, our individualities end and we
merge to become one with the Infinite, the all-pervading.
Therefore, the Lord says, "THEREAFTER YOU SHALL
LIVE IN ME."
This statement may look as an exaggeration for the finite
mortal, who is standing agitated and shy at the gateway of
the Temple-of-Truth. In this habitual concept that he is a
finite mortal entity --- pressed under a thousand
limitations, suffering from a host of imperfections, and
884

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

persecuted by an army of despairs --- he fails to accept
that he can rediscover himself to be Himself, the everDivine. Therefore, as a kindly teacher, Lord Krishna
reassures him by affirming directly, "no doubt" (Nasamshayah).
A TYPICAL MAN OF THE WORLD, ARJUNA, LOOKS
UP TO THE LORD, DECLARING HIS ABJECT
HELPLESSNESS TO ACCOMPLISH THESE TWO
SEEMINGLY SIMPLE, BUT PRACTICALLY IMPOSSIBLE
CONDITIONS
OF
MEDITATION.
AS
AN
ALTERNATIVE, THE LORD SAYS:
9. If you are unable to fix your mind steadily upon Me, then by
the 'YOGA -of constant-practice, ' seek to reach Me, O
Dhananjaya.
The technique of self-unfoldment was irrevocably
declared by the Lord in the previous verse. The seeker has
to fix his mind totally at the feet of the Lord and bring his
intellect to play upon and rip open the significance of the
Form-Divine. This double act needs an extremely subtle
intellect and single-pointedness of the mind. Perhaps
Arjuna felt, as any average man would, that this 'Path' was
almost impossible for him to pursue successfully. The
kindly teacher in Krishna, reading this despair from the
face of his disciple, tries to give him an alternative method
of Self-unfoldment.
885

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IF YOU ARE UNABLE TO FIX YOUR THOUGHTS
STEADILY ON ME --- Then the only practical method
would be to pursue the Yoga-of-constant-practice
(Abhyasa-Yoga). This Yoga-of-practice was earlier described
(in VI-26) as: "Wherever the mind wanders, restless, from
there let him subdue it and bring it under the sway of the
Self alone."
In short, whenever a meditator tries to meditate by fixing
his mind upon a chosen point-of-concentration, the fickle
mind will always try to run wild into dissimilar thoughtchannels. The advice here is to gather all the rays of the
mind, whenever they wander away from their main pointof-concentration, and focus them all again and again on
the Divine Form.
Every meditator must admit that the mind steadily fails to
balance on, for any length of time, totally engaging itself
with the theme of its contemplation. That the mind runs
away into a wild wool-gathering is not in itself such a
tragedy as that when the meditator himself gets abducted
by the mind and unconsciously follows it into the fields of
ready distractions. The Yogeshwara (Krishna) is only
advising us not to get enticed away by the mind from our
divine pursuit.
In order to gather the dissipated and riotous mental rays
and to focus them at the point-of-concentration, the
meditator must develop a capacity to stand by himself,
886

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and in himself, apart from his wandering mind. If we
identify ourselves with the mind, wherever the mind takes
us, we also must go. Therefore, in order to control the
mind, the meditator must stand apart from his mind,
identifying himself with that power in him which
possesses the ability to rule over and direct his mental
energies. This direct controller and ruler of the mind is the
higher faculty in man called the intellect. With our
discriminating capacity alone can we rule over the lesser
faculties of the mind in ourselves.
This alternative method suggested by the Lord is to help
those who are not able to accomplish the most direct 'Path'
indicated in the previous stanza. By striving hard in
Abhyasa-Yoga for a length of time, our mind gets so well
disciplined that we will be able to practise the immediate
method of self-unfoldment advised in the earlier couplet.
IF THIS ALSO IS NOT POSSIBLE, THEN:
10. If you are unable even to practise ABHYASA-YOGA, be
you intent on performing actions for My sake; even by doing
actions for My sake, you shall attain perfection.
The thoroughness of the Hindu scriptures consists in
suggesting varying and exhaustive techniques of selfdevelopment. Psychologically, the technique is so
analytical that the more one studies it, the more one is
convinced of the 'path.' There is no "do it or else to hell"
887

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sort of threat ever seen anywhere in our great Shastras.
Any young man, open to intellectual conviction and
scientific appraisal, can get totally convinced of the Hindu
way of life.
If a meditator is agitated and wild in his mental
personality he will be incapacitated even to perform the"
Yoga-of-practice" (Abhyasa-Yoga). Here, Krishna advises
him not to struggle hard and thereby bring about
avoidable and unnecessary mental repressions and
psychological suppressions. The inner personality is a
million times more delicate than an unopened flower-bud
and to hasten its unfoldment is to ruin for ever its beauty
and fragrance. Meditation is only an attempt on our part
to create the necessary conditions, most favourable for an
early blossoming of the greater man in us. Naturally,
therefore, one who is incapable of performing one kind of
practice must be given an alternative method of selfdevelopment.
An individual will find it easy to gather his mind from its
chosen fields of dissipation only when the mind is gliding
NOW AND THEN into unworthy channels along the
impression-routes created by his own past actions. But if a
seeker is too full of such impressions and is so extremely
extrovert in nature as to make the practice of
concentration futile, then he is advised to surrender all his
actions unto the Lord in a spirit of dedication. In doing so,
even the most extrovert man will remember the Lord all
through his day's activities.
888

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This is the method unconsciously adopted and silently
pursued by all fathers towards their new-born child.
Every son is born to his father as a stranger. But, in a
couple of months, the father's love for the child increases,
and as years roll by, it gathers itself into a magnitude
wherein the father lives literally in the son. This happens
because, after the birth of the son, all actions and
experiences of the father are influenced by background
memory of the son, i. e., an unconscious spirit of
dedication towards him.
Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, is most practical in showing
here the 'Path' to an ordinary average man. It gives a hope
even to the most extrovert among us. It is indeed a royal
'Path' to the majority of us. Just as a firm's representative,
while talking, always associates himself with his firm and
says "we shall try to supply --- we are producing --- we are
not responsible," etc., and he identifies himself with the
great manufacturers, as if he is one of the directors of the
firm, although, in fact, he is only a low-paid local agent.
Similarly, if anyone of us were really to entertain in our
mind the firm idea that we are the agents of the Divine,
executing His will in all our external activities, then, not
only will our mind thereby be made to contemplate on the
Lord continuously, but we shall be drawing from
ourselves miraculous powers of efficiency, organisational
dexterity, and confident courage in all our undertakings,
big or small.

889

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

To a student of the ancient Vedic lore, as Arjuna was, this
statement, seemingly so simple, may bring along with it a
doubt as to its real potency. The orthodox are always
suspicious of an unorthodox declaration, even if it be
made by the greatest living man of the era, or even by a
Divine manifestation. Therefore, Krishna assures his
readers of the efficacy of the 'Path' advocated in the
second line: "EVEN BY DOING ACTIONS FOR MY SAKE
YOU SHALL ATTAIN PERFECTION."
Even while boiling some water, we are apt to call it as
"making tea." Though factually it is a lie, it is the whole
truth, for, once the water is boiled it does not take much
time, nor great labour to make tea. And therefore,
whenever water is boiled with the intention of making tea,
we generally name the initial act itself by the final goal.
Similarly, by the art of dedicating ourselves totally unto
the Lord, in and through all our daily activities and
contacts with the outer world, we will be developing, in
ourselves, the divine vasanas, and during our actions we
will be exhausting the existing impressions. Such a
prepared mind gets properly tuned up for the Yoga-ofpractice and soon it gains sufficient balance and equipoise
to contemplate steadily upon the Truth and get itself
merged therein.
AND SUPPOSING THERE BE ONE TO WHOM EVEN
THIS IS NOT POSSIBLE?

890

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

11. If you are unable to do even this, then taking refuge in Me,
self-controlled, renounce the fruits-of-all-actions.
In the previous stanza, we were advised to act in the
world outside, renouncing totally our ego, or the sense of
a separate, individualised existence. To the strongly
egoistic and self-opinionated one, this is not an easy task.
Such a man is extremely agitated (rajasic), with the force of
low impulses (tamas) poisoning his personality-structure.
Even to such seekers, belonging to the lowest conceivable
type, the Geeta has a 'path' of advise. Ordinarily, such
persons would have been a despair to all religions. Even
such chronic cases are taken up by the Geeta, treated
considerately, with simple methods, and finally elevated
to the highest personality-lustre and efficiency.
If self-dedication unto the Lord, in all activities, is
impossible, such individuals are advised here an equally
powerful alternative, viz., at least to "ABANDON THE
FRUITS-OF-ACTIONS, AND, TAKING REFUGE IN ME,
BE SELF-CONTROLLED" in all actions.
Lord Krishna seems to hate all those who are MERE wageearners. This is not the Bourgeois-contempt for the
labourer, or the higher-class vanity that makes some look
down upon the sweating wage-earners. In a socialistic
pattern of society, especially in an era of the welfare State,
any educated man must entertain this Krishna-impatience
with every worker in the nation who works only for his
wage or profit. In such a socialistic scheme of national life,
891

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

a worker, who works only for "higher wages, with less
hours of work, and with maximum inefficiency" is a
criminal who deserves to be punished, in any society. It is
this modern attitude, which we see reflected in Krishna's
condemnation of all those who work in the world "merely
for-the-fruit" --- meaning pay or wages.
The "fruit-of-an-action" is the action of the present-moment
maturing itself in a future-period of time. Today, if I
plough and sow the seeds, the profit in my harvest will
come only after a couple of months. And supposing a
farmer broods over the amount of profit that he is to get
out of the cultivation and thus wastes his time and energy
in dreaming over the possibilities of a success or a failure
of the crops, he will surely be an utter failure. Even
though this fact is very well known, the majority of us
waste our PRESENT chances, opportunities and time in
brooding over the FUTURE. All our energies get wasted in
our anxieties and fears of a horrid future which has not
yet come --- and which may not at all materialise! Krishna
urges us here only to curb these wasteful imaginations
and to live vitally, sincerely, fully and dynamically in the
PRESENT, shutting off all negative imaginations
regarding the FUTURE. Even this act can integrate our
personality and make it single-pointed and strong.
The above three verses give us three alternatives which
are in fact only three different types of mental medicines
to cure the mind of its various distractions. All of us are, to
a certain extent, extrovert. We differ from each other only
892

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in the thickness of the Vasana-layers that we entertain in
our inner-equipment. When a brass vessel is slightly dim,
an 'ash-treatment' is sufficient to polish it; if it is with a
thicker layer of oxide, some 'acid-dipping' will be needed.
Similarly, here, if the mind is thinly coated with Vasanas,
the slight distractions created by them can be controlled
by the Yoga-of-practice. But if the layer of Vasanas is thick,
then it can be treated with the Yoga-of action performed in
a spirit of Divine dedication. If the mind is shackled with
still thicker layers of Vasanas, then the seeker is advised 'to
curb his imagination' and act in the world (Karma-phalatyaga). As I said earlier, nowhere in the world's spiritual
literature do we see such an exhaustive treatment of the
different 'Paths' for self-development, as in the Geeta.
BUT THEY MUST BE PERFORMED SERIALLY, TO
INDICATE THAT THESE ARE NOT TO BE PURSUED
TOGETHER. NOW THE LORD EXTOLS
THE
ABANDONING-OF-THE-FRUITS
ACTIONS:

OF

ALL

12. 'Knowledge' is indeed better than 'practice' ; 'meditation' is
better than 'knowledge' ; 'renunciation of the fruits-of-actions'
is better than 'meditation' ; peace immediately follows
'renunciation. '
When a divine philosopher gives a discourse for the
benefit of a disciple who is confused and broken-down, it
893

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

is not sufficient if he merely enumerates the dry
philosophical truths; he must so beautifully arrange his
ideas that the very scheme of the discourse must help the
student to gather all the ideas together in a bunch. The
stanza, now under review, gives us one of the typical
examples in Krishna's discourse wherein he directly
makes an attempt to systematise his theoretical
disquisitions into a well-arranged pattern of thought.
Here we find a sequence of ideas, arranged in a
descending order of importance. When once this ladderof-ideas is brought completely within a seeker's
comprehension and when he learns the art of moving up
and down this ladder, he will master almost all the salient
points so far expounded in this chapter.
BETTER INDEED IS KNOWLEDGE THAN PRACTICE --Spiritual practices are not mere physical acts but are
disciplines that should ultimately tune up our mental and
intellectual levels. The inner personality cannot be
persuaded to toe the line with the physical acts of
devotion unless the practitioner has a correct grasp of
what he is doing. An intellectual conversion is a prerequisite to force the mind to act in the right spirit and to
gain a perfect attunement with the physical act. A correct
and exhaustive knowledge of what we are doing, and why
we are doing it, is an unavoidable pre-condition for
making our Yoga fruitful. Therefore, it is said here that a
knowledge of the psychological, intellectual and spiritual
894

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

implications of our practices is greater in importance than
the very external Yogic acts, or 'devotional performances.'
MEDITATION IS SUPERIOR TO KNOWLEDGE --- More
important than mere KNOWLEDGE is meditation upon
the very 'knowledge' so gathered. The technical
explanation --- of the why and the wherefore of religious
practices --- can be more easily learnt than understood. To
convert our learning into our understanding, there must
be necessarily a process of intellectual assimilation and
absorption. This cannot be accomplished by a mere factual
learning of the word-meanings. The students will have to
understand, in a hearty enthusiasm, the very meaning of
the Shastra, and this is possible only through long,
subjective, independent ponderings over the significant
terms in the Shastra-declarations. The process of inward
assimilation of knowledge can take place only through
meditation. Hence, in the hierarchy of importance,
"meditation" has been give a greater place than the
"KNOWLEDGE OF THE TECHNIQUE."
BETTER THAN MEDITATION IS THE ABANDONMENT OF FRUITS-OF-ACTION --- Meditation is an
attempt of the intellect to fly from the fields of its present
knowledge to a yonder destination of a better
understanding. In this flight to a vaster field, the intellect
must have the necessary energy and equipoise. Meditation
can never be possible for an individual in whom all
energies and steadiness of mind are shattered by the
agitations created by his own ruinous imaginations of the
895

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

future. In our discourses upon the previous stanza, we
have already shown how our anxiety for the future
generally depletes our vitality to face the present. All
fruits-of-actions definitely belong to the FUTURE, and to
be over-anxious about them is to invite a lot of idle
agitations into our bosom. Stormed by these agitations, we
lose all our equipoise and such an individual has no
ability to meditate upon and thereby assimilate the silent
significance of the great Shastras. Therefore, Krishna here
gives a greater place of importance in his ladder-of-ideas
to "THE RENUNCIATION OF THE FRUITS-OFACTION."
As a foot-note to his own declaration, he adds how
renunciation of our anxiety for the future immediately
brings about a healthy condition within ourselves.
"PEACE IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWS RENUNCIATION."
In fact, in Hinduism, renunciation (Sannyasa) is nothing
other than "giving up all our clinging attachments to the
pleasures arising out of our contact with the external sense
objects."
As a result of this renunciation, therefore, a dynamic
quietude comes to pervade the bosom in which the
intellect can meditate upon the knowledge of the Shastras,
and thereby understand the ways of self-development as
explained therein. And when, with this knowledge, one
uses one's seat of meditation, one is assured of definite
success and steady progress.
896

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WITH
REFERENCE
TO
THOSE
WHO
ARE
MEDITATING UPON THE IMPERISHABLE, THE
INFINITE, THE LORD PRESCRIBES A CERTAIN
MENTAL AND INTELLECTUAL CONDUCT WHICH
FORMS THE DIRECT MEANS TO PERFECTION:
13. He who hates no creature, who is friendly and
compassionate to all, who is free from attachment and egoism,
balanced in pleasure and pain, and forgiving . . .
14. Ever content, steady in meditation, self-controlled, possessed
of firm conviction, with mind and intellect dedicated to Me, he,
My devotee, is dear to me.
In the following seven stanzas (XII-13 to 19), in six
different sections, Lord Krishna enumerates the
characteristic features of a Man-of-Perfection, and thereby
prescribes the correct mode-of-conduct and the way-of-life
for all seekers. In these stanzas, the Yogeshwara has very
well succeeded in painting the picture of a true devotee
for Arjuna's understanding. As a true painter would again
and again step back from his canvas to judge his own
production and then go forward to it to lay a few more
strokes to bring out his theme into a more effective relief
on his canvas, so too Krishna is trying in these seven
stanzas to paint the mental beauty and the intellectual
equipoise of a true devotee, along with his relationship
with the world around him. No other part in the whole
Geeta can be compared with the beauty of expression that
897

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

we have in these stanzas, except perhaps, the description
of "the Man-of-Steady-Wisdom (II-55 to 68) that we read
in the second chapter.
Moral rules and ethical codes of behaviour are in
Hinduism not arbitrary commandments thrust upon its
followers by a Son of God, or by a Messiah. These rules of
conduct are copied from the behaviour of God-men who
had attained the spiritual perfection and had actually
lived among us. Seekers are those who are striving hard to
attain the spiritual experience of those Saints and Seers. A
devotee who is trying to attune himself with these Masters
of Yoga should necessarily start at least copying their
external behaviour and mental beauties, which constitute
the moral and ethical rules prescribed in our religion.
Eleven noble qualities are indicated in the above two
stanzas which constitute the OPENING SECTION.
Everyone of them declares a moral phase in the character
of Man-of-Perfection. One who has realised that the Spirit
everywhere is one and the same, and that the Spirit-in-All
alone is his own Self, cannot, thereafter, afford to hate
anyone, because, from his vision-of-understanding, there
is no one who is other than Him! No living man can afford
to hate his own right hand because he is in it too. Nobody
hates himself!
His attitude to all living creatures will be friendly, and he
is ever compassionate to all. He offers security of life to all
beings. He cannot regard anything as his and he is
898

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

completely free from the notion of egoism. Even-minded
in pain and pleasure, he remains supremely unaffected
even when beaten or abused. Always content, he
discovers a flawless infinite joy in himself whether he
obtains even the means of his bodily sustenance or not.
Steadfast in his meditation, self-controlled and firm in his
resolve, he lives on joyously, his mind and intellect "ever
centered in Me." "SUCH A PERFECT, DEVOTED YOGI,"
THE LORD SAYS, "IS DEAR TO ME."
The truth expressed in the stanza earlier, "I am very dear
to the Man-to-Wisdom and he is dear to Me" (VII-17), is
being more elaborately elucidated in all these seven verses
of this chapter.
MOREOVER:
15. He by whom the world is not agitated (affected) , and who
cannot be agitated by the world, who is freed from joy, envy,
fear, and anxiety --- he is dear to me.
This stanza constitutes the SECOND SECTION in which
again Lord Krishna enumerates three more characteristic
features of a real devotee.
"HE BY WHOM THE WORLD IS NOT AGITATED" --- A
Man-of-Perfection is one who will not create any
agitations in the world around him. Where the Sun is,
there cannot be any darkness, where the peaceful Master
899

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of Equanimity and Perfection dwells, he, by the intrinsic
divinity in him, creates, as it were, an atmosphere of
serene joy and endless peace around him; and even those,
who are agitated in the world, will suffer no more from
such agitations when they approach such a master-mind,
and enjoy a peace in themselves. In fact, the world
irresistibly rushes to such a saint to bask in his brilliance
and comes to experience the joy which he wafts all around
him!
"WHO CANNOT BE AGITATED BY THE WORLD" --Not only does a Man-of-Perfection quieten the very world
around him, into a dynamic peace, but also the world,
however chaotic, revolting, boisterous, and vengeful it
may be, cannot create any agitations in him. The world-ofobjects will almost always be in a state of flux, and its
maddening death-dance cannot bring even a whiff of its
storms to disturb the calm serenity of the saint. He is
made of stronger mettle and his life is built upon surer
foundations.
The floating reeds dance on the surface of the sea but the
light-house that is built on the rocks beneath stands erect
and motionless, watching the smooth sea turning rough
with the rise of the tidal waves. The personality of a
perfect-man is rooted in his realisation of the deeper
substratum of life; and, since he is not attached to the
superficial conditions of matter and its playful magic, any
amount of wild agitations outside cannot bring any
disturbance to his inner equipoise. In and through the
900

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

battling circumstances, he perceives the changeless
ground --- he hears the harmony that runs through the
various discordant notes in life around.
"HE IS COMPLETELY FREED FROM" all the usual causes
for inward agitations such as "JOY, ENVY, FEAR AND
ANXIETY." A devotee of this type, ever peaceful with
himself and the world, who rules over the circumstances
and never yields to be victimised by them, who has
crossed over the usual weaknesses of the mortal heart --such a devotee "IS DEAR TO ME."
CONTINUING
DECLARES:

THE

SAME

TOPIC

THE

LORD

16. He who is free from wants, pure, alert, unconcerned,
untroubled, renouncing all undertakings (or commencements) -- he who is (thus) devoted to Me, is dear to Me.
This stanza represents the THIRD SECTION, which
throws more light upon the picture of the perfect-devotee
as conceived by the Lord Himself. Already in the above
two sections, fourteen indications were given and to that
total picture are added in this section six subtler items.
" FREE FROM DEPENDENCE " (Anapekshah) --- A true
devotee no more depends upon either the objects of the
world outside, or their pattern, or their relationships with
himself. An ordinary man discovers his peace and joy
901

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

only in the world-of-objects available for him, their
conditions, and their arrangements around him. When the
right type of object is in the right pattern courting him
favourably, a man of the world feels temporarily thrilled
and joyous. But a real devotee is completely independent
of the world outside and he draws his inspiration,
equanimity and joyous ecstasy from a source, deep within
himself.
"WHO IS PURE" (Shuchih) --- Dirt has no place anywhere
within or without a true devotee. One who is aspiring to
reach perfection will necessarily be so well-disciplined
physically that he will be clean not only in his relationship
with others but even in the very condition and
arrangement of his belongings around him. It is very well
known that the condition of a man's table or shelf, and the
cleanliness of his apparel, can give a great insight into the
mental nature, discipline and culture of that man. Great
emphasis has been laid in India on this physical purity,
not only in the person of the man but also of his contacts
in the world. Without external purity, internal purification
will be but a vague dream, an idle hope, a despairing
vision.
"ALERT" (Dakshah) --- To be alert always becomes the
second nature of an integrated person. Enthusiasm is the
key to success in any undertaking. A dynamic person is
not one who slips in his behaviour or action. He is
mentally agile and intellectually vigorous. Since there is
no dissipation in him, he is ever on his toes to spring
902

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

forward to activity, once he determines to shoulder any
endeavour. If we observe the degree of idleness,
carelessness, and ugliness in execution of any work, from
which all religious persons are suffering, we can
understand how far Hinduism has wandered away from
its pristine glory!
UNCONCERNED (Udaseenah) --- It is not difficult for one
to observe many devotees in this land who have resigned
themselves to a state of unexpressed sorrow, because they
have been cheated by others, ill-treated by society, and
persecuted by the community. The foolish devotees think
that they will be unconcerned about these outrages
practiced on them and then their own devotion for the
Lord must prove to themselves a wretched liability, rather
than a positive gain! Philosophy misunderstood can easily
end in the suicide of the community.
The "unconcerned attitude" is only meant here to
economise our mental energies. In human life, small
difficulties, simple illnesses, discomforts, wants etc., are
but natural. To exaggerate their importance and strive to
escape from them all is to enter into a life-long struggle of
adjustments. In all such instances, the student is warned
not to squander away his mental energies but to conserve
them by overlooking these little pin-pricks of life in an
attitude of utter indifference towards them.
FREE FROM TREMBLING --- The inward tremors are
experienced only when any burning desire has conquered
903

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

us completely. Once victimised by a desire or fascination
for an object, the individual personality becomes
tremulous in fear that its desire may not be fulfilled. A
true seeker is one, who never allows the inner person in
him to enter into any such fears or agitations.
RENOUNCING EVERY UNDERTAKING --- In Sanskrit
"Aarambha" means "beginning." "To end all beginnings,"
does not mean "not to undertake anything." This literal
translation has made the majority of Hindus incompetent
idlers and our religion has been criticized as glorifying
idleness as a divine ideal! The deeper suggestions are
overlooked. To perceive any definite beginning in an
undertaking, the individual actor must have a solid and
gross egoistic claim that he had begun it himself. He must
have the strong feeling that he is beginning an activity, for
the purpose of gaining a definite goal, whereby he will be
fulfilling a specific desire of his, or will thereby be gaining
a positive profit. One who is a seeker of the Divine,
striving to reach the higher cultural perfections, must
renounce this egoistic sense of self-importance and work
on in the world.
No undertaking in our life, in fact, is a new act that has an
independent beginning or end. All actions in the world
are in an eternal pattern of the total world-movements. If
correctly analysed, our undertakings are controlled,
regulated, governed and ordered by the available worldof-things and situations. Apart from them all, no
independent action is undertaken, or can be fulfilled by
904

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

anyone. A devotee of Truth is ever conscious of this
oneness of the Universe, and therefore, he will always
work in the world only as AN INSTRUMENT OF THE
LORD and not as an independent agent in the
undertaking.
Such a devotee who possesses all the six qualifications
enumerated above "IS DEAR TO ME."
ADDING A FEW STROKES, KRISHNA PAINTS THE
PICTURE INTO A MORE REALISTIC VIVIDNESS:
17. He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires,
renouncing good and evil, full of devotion, is dear to Me.
A perfect devotee is one who has lifted himself from the
world of his mind-intellect and has awakened to his inner
Spiritual Nature. As such, the ordinary experiences of joy
and sorrow, of pain and pleasure, which generally give
the restlessness of life do not affect him.
HE WHO NEITHER REJOICES --- 'Rejoicing' is the feeling
of satisfaction and fulfilment that comes to us on attaining
a desired object, which is extremely desirable, and
extremely difficult to realise.
NOR HATES --- The sense of revulsion that comes to us
towards undesirable things and circumstances, when they
crowd around us, is generally the sense of HATRED. In
short, these two terms indicate that there are no objects
905

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

which he would ardently like to acquire, nor is there any
occasion to fret about on coming in contact with things or
situations that are undesirable from his standpoint.
NEITHER GRIEVES, NOR DESIRES --- Grief is generally
experienced while parting with a beloved object, and
desires are entertained when one yearns to have and to
possess something unattained at present. A Man-ofPerfection is one whose beloved object, the Self, can never
be apart from him. And he has no sense of attachment
with any other object. Having attained the Self, the
inhabitant of his heart, he has such a complete sense of
fulfilment that he has no more any desire for attaining
anything that he has not attained. The Self being the All,
he has attained everything.
RENOUNCING GOOD AND EVIL --- The happenings in
the world around us can fall under these two categories,
according to whether they arouse in us a feeling of joy or
sorrow. To any person who is living away from the realm
of the dualistic experiences, and who has learnt the art of
drawing inspiration from something beyond, none of the
happenings, here at the level of the mind and the intellect,
can be of any serious consequences.
The above terms used in the stanza, for painting a perfectman, have a secret import. If we consider only the literal
meaning, we will think that such a perfect-man is a dead
corpse; "NEITHER REJOICES, NOR HATES; NOR
DESIRES; RENOUNCING GOOD AND EVIL" --- he lies
906

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dead! This is a very striking example of how the literal
meanings are not at all what is to be understood in
scriptural declarations.
Similarly, when a true devotee, being awakened to the
God-Consciousness, evaluates life from his new height of
experience, he cannot rejoice or hate, grieve for or desire
anything in this world and he comes to renounce totally
the very concepts of good and evil. The Divine Charioteer
(Krishna) declares: "HE WHO IS SUCH A DEVOTEE IS
DEAR TO ME."
The stanza represents the FOURTH SECTION in which
again the Lord has enumerated six more qualities that
make up a perfect devotee. So far we have been told of
twenty-six subtle traits which are the 'intrinsic qualities of
a Perfect Yogi.'
IN A LAST WAVE OF ENTHUSIASM KRISHNA
ENUMERATES:
18. He who is the same to foe and friend, and also in honour and
dishonour, who is the same in cold and heat and in pleasure and
pain, who is free from attachment . . .
19. To whom censure and praise are equal, who is silent, content
with anything, homeless, steady-minded, full of devotion --- that
man is dear to Me.
907

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

EQUAL TO FOE AND FRIEND --- The estimation of our
relationship with another as foe or friend is generally our
own psychological reaction towards another. It belongs
essentially to the heart. It is experienced by the
PSYCHOLOGICAL being in us. A Man-of-Perfection is one
who is not identifying himself with his mental estimation
of things, and therefore, he is equanimous and maintains a
uniformity of attitude towards his friends and foes.
AND SO TOO, IN HONOUR AND DISHONOUR --- A
situation is judged by the intellect as honourable or dishonourable with reference to its own existing values and
cultivated habits of thinking. That which is ordinarily
considered dishonourable can itself come to be estimated
by the same person as honourable in a new pattern of
circumstances ordered by a change in time and place. On
the whole, these are all different tides in the intellect; and
those who are living in that realm are affected by them.
WHO IS THE SAME IN HEAT AND COLD --- Heat and
cold are only the experiences of the body. By remembering
the preparation process of Nitric Acid, my 'thoughts'
cannot get corroded; by feeling the smouldering beauty of
the burning embers in the fire-place, my 'mind' cannot get
blisters. My knowledge or my capacity to love cannot
freeze at the North Pole; nor get evaporated in the Sahara
desert. Heat and cold affect only the body. And this idiom
in Sanskrit, whenever it is used in the context of
philosophy, represents all types of experiences to which
the physical equipment is the heir.
908

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The above three terms thus comprehend the entire
possibility of experiences in life: physical, mental, and
intellectual. In all of them, a true devotee is unagitated
because he "IS FREE FROM ATTACHMENT". Attachment
to and identification with the matter equipments --- body,
mind, intellect --- is the cause by which we are helplessly
made to dance to the mad tunes which the chance
happenings dictate. One who is detached from these
equipments is the one who is a master of them all.
TO WHOM CENSURE AND PRAISE ARE EQUAL --- Not
that he is immune to insults, nor is it because he is not
intelligent enough to understand them. To a great
devotee, living as he is in a realm of his own, full of
transcendental and blissful experiences of the Divine, the
worldly censure or even praise has no significance or
importance at all. He realises that one who has been
praised today will be censured by society tomorrow, and
that yesterday's censured man becomes the praiseworthy
leader of today!! Praise and censure are in themselves
nothing more than the passing fancy of those who express
them!
HE IS SILENT --- A true seeker of wisdom becomes a man
of few words --- not only physically but even mentally.
Silence within is real silence (Mouna). Keeping physical
silence but letting the mind loose to talk in itself, generally
results in a serious type of repression which ultimately
drives many to the porch of a mental hospital. Be silent
and understand how really silent silence can be!
909

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

CONTENT WITH ANYTHING --- Contented with
anything that might reach him accidentally, unasked and
unexpected, is the motto of all serious seekers of inward
growth. To entertain the demands in life and to strive
forth to satisfy them would be an unending game, as the
mind has a knack of breeding its own demands very fast.
The policy of contentment is the only intelligent attitude
to be taken up by all sincere seekers or else there will be
no time to seek, to strive for and to achieve the diviner
goal of life. Self-integration is a reward promised for
faithful pursuits and all-out attention. It is said in the
Mahabharata "he who is clad with anything, who is fed on
any FOOD, who lies down ANYWHERE, HIM THE
GODS CALL A BRAHMANA.
HOMELESS --- Home is generally that which provides
shelter from the external inclemencies of weather, for the
resident who is dwelling under its roof. The man of
spiritual realisation is one who is trying to pull down all
his conditionings and striving to free himself from all
sense of possession and material shackles.
Living under a roof, in itself, does not make the place a
home. To spend a night on a railway station, or in the
retiring room at an aerodrome, does not make the place
the traveller's own home. It is only along with a sense of
possession, reinforced with a sense of happiness and
comfort, that the place under a roof becomes a home. A
true devotee has for himself a satisfactory shelter only at
the feet of the All-Pervading, and therefore, his mental
910

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

condition is indicated here by the simple pertinent word
'homeless.'
Steadfast in his intellectual understanding of the goal, and
ever striving to attain his Divine ideal, that the Bhakta
dwells on --- "THAT MAN IS DEAR TO ME." There is
almost a suggestion, even though by implication, that one
who is at least striving to live these values is a full grown
man (Nara) to the Geeta Acharya.
These two verses represent the FIFTH SECTION which
enumerates ten more different qualities. In short, in thirtysix artistic strokes, Lord Krishna has brought about a
complete picture of the Seeker-of-Perfection --- his
relationship with the world outside, his psychological life
and his intellectual evaluation of the world of beings and
happenings.
THE ENUMERATION OF THE VARIOUS MORAL,
ETHICAL AND SPIRITUAL QUALITIES OF A TRUE
DEVOTEE IS CONCLUDED WITH THESE:
20. They indeed, who follow this 'Immortal DHARMA' (Law of
Life) as described above, endowed with faith, regarding Me as
their Supreme Goal --- such devotees are exceedingly dear to
Me.
THIS IMMORTAL LAW PRESCRIBED ABOVE --- The
Sanatana Dharma is summarised in the above lines. To
911

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

realise the Self and live in that wisdom at all our
personality levels --- physical, mental and intellectual --- is
the fulfilment of the life of a Hindu. It is not sufficient that
a Hindu understands this, or reads regularly his
scriptures, or even explains them intelligently. He must be
able to digest them properly, assimilate them fully, and
become Perfect. Therefore, Bhagavan says that he must be
"ENDOWED WITH FAITH" here the term 'faith' means
"the necessary capacity to assimilate spiritual ideas into
ourselves through subjective personal experience."
SUCH DEVOTEES ARE SUPREMELY DEAR TO ME --This concluding stanza of the chapter constitutes the
SIXTH SECTION adding no definite trait to the list of
THIRTY-SIX QUALITIES already explained. But it forms a
commandment, a divine reassurance to all spiritual
seekers that when they accomplish these qualities in
themselves they will gain the Supreme Love of the Lord.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the twelfth discourse
ends entitled: THE YOGA OF DEVOTION
Though this chapter is styled as Bhakti Yoga, to read and
assimilate it is to cherish true love for the Lord and cure
ourselves of the various misconceptions that we have
today in our practice of Devotion. The 'Path-of-Devotion'
is not a mere sentimental explosion, or an excessive
912

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

emotional display. It is not a mere frivolous hysteria. It is
the blossoming of the human personality through the
surrender of our limitations and by acquiring new vitality
during the inspired moments of deep contemplation.
Om Om Om Om Om

913

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 13
Kshetra Kshetrajna Vibhaga Yoga
The Yoga of the Field and the Knower of the Field
Arjuna said: 1. PRAKRITI (Matter) and PURUSHA (Spirit) ,
also the KSHETRA (the Field) and KSHETRAJNA (the
Knower-of-the-Field) , Knowledge and that which ought to be
known --- these, I wish to learn, O Keshava.
In several manuscripts, this stanza is not found. But in
some others, it is met with as a doubt expressed by
Arjuna.
PRAKRITI AND PURUSHA --- In the Sankhyan Philosophy
in India, the Acharyas have used these two technical terms
to indicate the inert-equipments (Prakriti) and the vital
sentient-Truth (Purusha) that sets the entire assemblage of
matter in action. In short, Prakriti is matter and Purusha is
the Spirit. The Spirit, in Itself, has no expression except
when It plays through matter. When Purusha weds
Prakriti, the experiences of good and bad are in legion
born. Electricity, in itself, cannot manifest as light. But
when it weds the bulb, it is manifested as light.

914

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE FIELD AND THE KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD --- We
have already explained these two terms in our
introduction to this chapter. The "KNOWER-OF-THEFIELD" is the status of the Knowing-Principle when It is
functioning in the "FIELD-OF-THE-KNOWN." Bereft of
the field-of-objects, the "Knower" himself becomes nothing
but "Pure Knowledge," without the functions of knowing
attached to It.
THE
MECHANISM
AND
THE
OBJECTS-OF
KNOWLEDGE --- Conditioned knowledge-bits, meaning,
knowledge-of-things, are the constant experiences of all
living creatures in life. Naturally, an investigation into the
"mechanism of knowing" and
its manipulations and the "true object to be known" will be
helpful to all seekers.
LISTEN, HOW THE LORD ANSWERS ALL THESE
QUESTIONS CATEGORICALLY:
The Blessed Lord said: 2. This body, O Kaunteya is called
KSHETRA (the Field) and he who knows it is called
KSHETRAJNA (the Knower-of-the-Field) by those who know
them (KSHETRA and KSHETRAJNA) i. e. , by the sages .
The experience of Perfection is subjective. The Vedantic
seers of Hindu Scriptures are unanimous in their
conclusion that a subjective quest is the "path" to
915

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

rediscover and ultimately realise the Self. In this chapter,
we find a beautiful philosophical dissection of the
subjective structure of man, exposing the matter
envelopments that condition the Spirit. A discriminative
knowledge of the matter layers, as distinct from the
"Spiritual-Core," will show the seeker the way to
rediscover his identity with the Spirit, and realise the
actual non-existence of matter, when viewed from the
realm of the Spirit.
A "waker" in a certain mental frame-work, himself
becomes a "dreamer," and, to the "dreamer" the dream is
real as long as the dream continues. But on awakening, the
"dreamer" realises that the dream was only a
misinterpretation of the waking, rendered by the
"dreamer's" own mind. Similarly, the pluralistic world is
perceived when the Spirit views through its own
imaginary world of matter, and on awakening to Its own
spiritual status it rediscovers Its own Absolute Reality in
which the "phantom" of matter has no existence at all.
Thus, in a living man, philosophically viewed, there are
two aspects: the inert and insentient matter-layers, and the
sentient and vital Consciousness. These two aspects are
defined in this stanza.
THIS BODY O! SON OF KUNTI, IS CALLED THE FIELD -- In this mechanical age, it is very easy to understand that
there must be a 'field' for energy to play in, and that, then
alone it can manifest as work done and serve man. Steam916

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

energy cannot be resolved into locomotion unless it is
made to pass through a steam-engine. Electricity cannot
give us breeze unless it passes through the machine of a
fan. The equipments (or assembly of matter layers),
through which Life passes when an individuality is
expressed, are defined here by Krishna as the "Field."
HE WHO KNOWS IT, IS CALLED THE "KNOWER-OFTHE-FIELD" --- This field is made up of lifeless matter, the
minerals. And yet, as long as it lives and functions, it
KNOWS. This "principle-of-knowing," functioning in the
"field" is the "enjoyer-of-the-field;" the "knower," the EGO.
As long as life exists in any living organism, it expresses
an urge to know. The degree of this urge may vary from
individual to individual in the Universe. But the urge to
know, expressed through an equipment, is what we
recognise as its life. The capacity of an organism to receive
stimuli and send forth responses is the transaction of life,
and when this "knower" --- the individuality, has departed
from the equipment, we consider it as dead. This is the
"Knower-of-the-Field" (Kshetrajna).
BY THOSE WHO KNOW OF THEM --- Here, Lord
Krishna has assured his listeners that the definitions given
by him to the terms "body" and the "knower-of-the-body"
are not arbitrary declarations or hypothetical
suppositions, but are in keeping with the actual
experiences of all the great Masters of yore. In short, here
we have a definition of matter (Kshetra) and the Spirit
917

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

functioning through it (Kshetrajna). The entire world-ofobjects constitutes the kingdom of matter; and the vital
knower of the world-of-matter, constituted of the
equipments and their array of perceptions, feelings and
thoughts, is the Spirit.
IS THIS ALL THE KNOWLEDGE THAT ONE HAS TO
ACQUIRE ABOUT THEM? --- NO, --- LISTEN:
3. Know Me as the "Knower-of-the-Field" in all "Fields, " O
Bharata; Knowledge of the "Field" as also of the "knower-of-theField" is considered by Me to be My Knowledge.
After indicating, in the previous stanza, the world-ofmatter and the thrilling Spirit-of-Truth that presides over
it, here is a staggering announcement, "I AM THE
KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD IN ALL FIELDS." If, in all
"Fields" the "Knower" is one, then the plurality is only in
the matter-envelopments, and the Life that presides over
them is one everywhere. This Universal One, the
Transcendental Truth is indicated here by the first person
singular "I AM" because every seeker has to rediscover in
himself, "That I am" (Soham).
We had already indicated earlier that Lord Krishna is
expounding the Geeta in a rare moment of Yogic
integration (Yogarudha state). He is identifying himself
with the Self that is everywhere. This is something like
918

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

electricity declaring: "I am the one energy that gives the
glow in all filaments all over the world."
After indicating the One Spirit behind the entire world-ofmatter, wherever it may be, Krishna declares that,
according to Him, a correct knowledge (vitally
experienced and lived) of what constitutes in each one of
us the perishable, changeable, finite, inert matter, and of
the nature of the Infinite, Imperishable and Sentient Spirit
--- is the Supreme Knowledge. Kshetra is the field-ofmatter which is constituted of the various equipments of
perception and the vast fields of the perceived. Kshetrajna
is the subject that enjoys the activities of the instruments
of perception and the world perceived by them. To
distinguish the world-of-the-subject from the world-ofthe-objects is the salutary Knowledge, which can redeem
us from the confusions and sorrows from which we suffer
today as individualised egos.
SINCE A PRECISE KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD OF
SUBJECT AND OF THE OBJECTS IS UNAVOIDABLE TO
A TRUE SEEKER WALKING THE PATH OF
KNOWLEDGE, WE WILL HAVE TO MAKE AN
EXHAUSTIVE STUDY OF THEM. THEREFORE:
4. What that Field is; of what nature it is; what are its
modifications; whence it is; and also who He is; and what His
powers are --- these hear from Me in brief.
919

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OF WHAT NATURE --- Not only are we going to have a
discussion of what constitutes the "Field", the Kshetra, but
also of what it is in itself. "OF WHAT NATURE", meaning,
what are its properties. "AND WHENCE IS WHAT"
meaning, what effects arise from what causes i. e. what are
the by-products when it changes its form? What is its
origin? Who is He, the Knowing Principle in the field?
What are His powers of perception, feeling and thought?
All these "HEAR, BRIEFLY FROM ME."
A mere repetition of the qualities of the Infinite Self is, in
itself, of no profit at all to a true seeker. Nor can any
evolution actually take place by an over-emphasis of the
qualities of the Spirit. To close our eyes to the causes that
create our present problems is not to solve the problems.
The world-of-matter that has been projected by ourselves
around us and the process by which we work through it
to perceive the infinite varieties of objects, feelings and
thoughts --- all these are to be brought under our close
observation and study. To ignore them is to cheat
ourselves so much about the "essential knowledge."
At least a working knowledge of the enemy's strategy is
essential in planning our anti-strategic movements. To
know the nature of all matter envelopments --- their play,
and how they behave under given sets of different
circumstances --- is to know the "Field" where we have to
battle for release and win our victory.

920

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus physiology, biology, psychology and all the natural
sciences have a real quota of help to give us. The spiritual
"path," especially the 'Path-of-Knowledge,' is the
culmination and the fulfilment of the secular sciences. This
is very well brought out by the fact that, when Lord
Krishna, even in the midst of the battle-front, is trying to
explain the secrets of the Spirit to the warrior Arjuna, He
does not fail to emphasise the importance of a close study
of the "Field" provided by the world-of-matter.
IN ORDER TO CREATE A LIVELY ENTHUSIASM IN
THE STUDENTS TO OBSERVE, STUDY AND
UNDERSTAND THE WORLD-OF-MATTER AROUND
THE SPIRIT, KRISHNA IS GLORIFYING THE VERY
THEME OF THIS CHAPTER. LISTEN:
5. RISHIS have sung (about the "Field" and the "Knower-ofthe-Field" ) in many ways, in various distinctive chants and
also in the suggestive words indicative of BRAHMAN, full of
reason and decision.
The explanations that are to follow are not idle talk, or
clever intellectual manifestations, springing from the
fertile imagination of Shri Krishna. In the entire discourse,
(in Chapter XIII itself) Krishna assures us that what He
explains is only a healthy restatement of what "HAS BEEN
SUNG BY THE RISHIS IN MANY WAYS, IN DIFFERENT
HYMNS, SEVERALLY." In short, the subject-matter dealt
921

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

with here is the very theme which the Upanishads have
indicated in their secret verses, especially so "in its
passages about Brahman."
Why should we so readily accept these statements of the
Rishis in the Upanishads except in a stunned admiration
nurtured by our blind belief in them? Krishna points out
that even if we had no great respect or reverence for the
Rishis as such, we will have to accept their declarations
because they are not intellectual dictations, or divine
commandments, thrust upon the helpless laity by some
winged angels assuming divine prerogative and claiming
special sources of secret knowledge. This is the general
attitude that poisons the scriptures of almost all other
religions. As a contrast to them, our Upanisadic declarations
are "FULL OF REASONING AND SO CONVINCING."
When a truth is declared, along with logical reasoning, the
conclusions arrived at are acceptable to any intelligent
student by the sheer force of its appeal.
WHEN ARJUNA IS THUS PREPARED TO LISTEN
ATTENTIVELY TO THE DISCOURSE OF THE "FIELD"
AND ITS "KNOWER," THE LORD SAYS:
6. The great elements, egoism, intellect, and also the
unmanifested (MOOLA-PRAKRITI) , the ten senses and the
one (the mind) and the five objects-of-the-senses, . . .
922

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

7. Desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, aggregate (body) , intelligence,
fortitude --- this KSHETRA has been thus briefly described
with its modifications.
From here onwards, the promised themes for discussion
are taken up one by one by the teacher and upon each of
them He gives an exhaustive exposition. These two verses,
enumerate the various items together constituting the
"Field" (Kshetra), which was indicated in a previous stanza
(Ibid., verse 2.) as "this body" (Idam Shariram).
"THE GREAT ELEMENTS" (Mahabhutas) --- They are five
in number --- space, air, fire, water and earth. They are the
rudimentary elements (tanmatras) out of the combinations
of which the grosser elements --- indicated here in the
stanza by the term "Perceptible" (Indriya-gocharaah) Great
Elements --- are formed.
THE EGOISM (Ahamkara) --- This is the sense of "I"-ness
and "My"-ness that arises in us in our identification with
the world-of-objects. It is this that is the 'perceiver' and
'enjoyer' of this world, and that enjoys and suffers the joys
and sorrows of its own world of likes and dislikes, loves
and hatreds, and ever weeps in its innumerable
attachments in the world outside. The individuality
arising out of our relationships with the world-of-matter,
is called the "Ego."
INTELLECT (Buddhi) --- The 'determining-faculty' which
rationally thinks and comes to its own conclusions and
923

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

judges good and bad in every experience of a living man
is called the intellect.
UNMANIFESTED (Avyakta) --- That which rules the
functions of a given mind and intellect, and determines
their activities in the world-outside, is the unmanifested
factor called the "vasanas." The impressions, left over in the
mental equipment as a result of our conscious enjoyment
of the world-outside, determine the direction and the
pattern of all our subsequent perceptions and feelings.
Mental capacities and intellectual decisions are
determined in each individual, and his aptitudes are
ordered by the type of impressions (vasanas) left over in
his subtle-body as a result of his previous ego-centric
existence amidst the world-of-objects. This source of all
individual activities is the residual vasanas in the
individual. Naturally, therefore, in its macrocosmic aspect,
the total universe of men and things, and their behaviours,
must spring from the total vasanas is called in Sanskrit as
the "Moola-Prakriti" by the Sankhyans, or as Maya by the
Vedantins. The Supreme functioning through Maya (MoolaPrakriti) is the Creator of the total Universe; and the same
Supreme, functioning through the vasana-layers in the
individual (Avidya), is the creator, sustainer and destroyer
of the individual life, the "Ego."
From this, it is so evident that the Unmanifested is but the
unseen cause, total vasanas, which has manifested as the
"seen" --- the world-of-objects.
924

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE TEN SENSES --- The five sense organs of perception
and the five sense organs of action are the vehicles by
which each individual perceives the stimuli and responds
to them.
THE ONE (Ekam) --- In the context here, this stands for the
mind. Even though the sense organs are many, the faculty
in us that receives all the stimuli, from all the five avenues
of perception, is one and the same, the mind. Not only
does the mind receive the stimuli but it also executes the
judgement of the intellect and sends forth responses to the
outer-world. It is again the only outlet for the individual
personality to express through. The "one" here, therefore,
represents the mind.
THE FIVE OBJECTS OF THE SENSES --- Each sense organ
has only one definite field of sense objects to perceive. The
eyes can perceive only forms; the ears can listen to sounds;
the nose can smell; the tongue can taste; and the skin can
perceive the touches. No one of the sense organs can
perceive the objects of the other sense organs. Thus, there
are five distinct types of sense objects. And, in fact, the
entire gross world perceived is nothing other than a play
of all these five types of sense objects.
The twenty-four factors so far enumerated are the famous
24 principles (Tattwas) of the Sankhyan Philosophy.
Lord Krishna, in enumerating the items constituting the
"Field," does not stop with these gross equipments-of925

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

matter; but includes even their "modifications" such as
desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the assemblage of the body
(Samghata), intelligence, steadfastness, etc. In short not
only do the gross body, mind and intellect constitute the
entire world-of-objects, but even the perceptions
experienced through them, the world-of-objects, the
emotions and thoughts are also included in the allcomprehensive term; the "Field" (Kshetram) --- "this body"
(Idam Shariram).
Anything other than the subject belongs to the world-ofobjects, and can be perceived as an object. Mental,
emotional, and intellectual ideas are also the objects of our
knowledge, and therefore, with reference to the Subject all
that is seen, felt, or known are but objects. This entire
world-of-objects is indicated in the Geeta in this chapter
by the phrase "this body" --- the "Field."
In a word, the entire world of "knowable" together in a
bunch, can be labelled as the Field (Kshetra). And the
Knowing-Principle, seemingly functioning as the
"Knower" (Kshetrajna), is the Subject. To distinguish the
Subject from the world-of-objects, an exhaustive
understanding of what constitutes the object is necessary.
Hence this elaborate enumeration. The entire world-ofmatter in the cosmos has been directly, as well as by
implication, embraced in these two stanzas.
The following section, constituted of five consecutive
verses together, lists twenty qualities, which in their
926

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

totality indicate the "Knower" (Kshetrajna). In fact, the
"Knower-of-the-Field" is directly described (in XIII-12)
but, in the following couplets, (in XIII-8 to 12) certain
mental and emotional attributes, moral attitudes and
ethical principles are prescribed since they are essential
pre-requisites for the seeker who is anxious to apprehend
and experience the Infinite Self.
THEY ARE ENUMERATED AS FOLLOWS:
8. Humility, unpretentiousness, non-injury, forgiveness,
uprightness, service to the teacher, purity, steadfastness, selfcontrol . . .
From this stanza onwards, we get a description of the
elements of "Knowledge" and they include moral qualities
and ascetic practices which are conducive to spiritual
awakening.
HUMILITY --- meaning, absence of self-esteem;
MODESTY --- the virtue of not proclaiming one's own
greatness; NON-INJURY --- to any living being mainly by
our own vicious intentions and feelings; FORGIVENESS
(PATIENCE) --- capacity to suffer long without being
upset; UPRIGHTNESS --- comes to him who harmonises
thoughts, words and deeds, and who is intent on right
conduct; SERVICE TO THE TEACHER --- not merely
physical, for real service to the teacher is an attempt on the
part of the student to seek a mental and intellectual
927

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

identity with the teacher's pure heart and intellect;
PURITY --- not merely the cleanliness of the seeker's
thoughts and physical structure, but also of his dress and
other belongings and of the environments in which he is
living. It also comprehends the inner purity of thoughts
and emotions, intentions and motives, passions and urges;
STEADFASTNESS --- consistency of purpose and
concentration of all efforts towards achieving the cultural
and the spiritual goal striven for; SELF-CONTROL --- selfrestraint practised at all the personality-layers, both in
their collective and several contacts with the world
outside...
MOREOVER:
9. Indifference to the objects of the sense, and also absence of
egoism, perception of (or reflection upon) evils in birth, death,
old age, sickness and pain. . .
ABSENCE OF ATTACHMENT FOR OBJECTS --- This
does not mean running away from the objects-of-theworld. Living in the midst of these objects, to switch off
our mental pre-occupations with them; living amidst the
objects detachedly and not getting shackled by them --this is meant here by the term Vairagya. To run away from
the objects and to indulge in them mentally amounts to
suppressions, and such a suppressed individual is labelled
(in III-6) as a hypocrite (Mithya-chara) by the Lord Himself.
928

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ABANDONMENT OF THE THOUGHT OF 'I' --- The
individuality-sense comes only when we identify
ourselves with the equipments and their perceptions. To
reduce this delusory misconception of ourselves is an
essential pre-requisite for asserting and living our own
real divine nature. This is equivalent to the weeding that
must precede planting in any field of cultivation.
PERCEPTION OF THE EVIL OF PAIN --- Feeling of
discontentment with the available situation alone can
goad us to discover a new state of existence. Whether it be
a nation, a community or a society, as long as they are not
aware of the fact that their present conditions are
despicable and tragic, they will adapt themselves to living
in that condition oblivious of their sorrows. Every political
or social worker first makes the people understand their
present state of degradation and destitution. When such
realisation comes to them, they are ready with all
enthusiasm, to seek fresh fields of greater joys and a fuller
life.
The same technique is applicable in the culture field.
Unless a seeker is fully conscious of the inward
personality-shackles in himself, he will live on in his own
ditch of sorrows, never striving to get out of it. Both the
human mind and body have a tremendous amount of
adaptability. They can adapt themselves to any condition
and even come to enjoy them.

929

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Unless a seeker is constantly conscious of the evil of the
pain in his present stage of existence, he will not discover
the necessary spiritual urge, intellectual dynamism,
emotional enthusiasm or physical courage to seek, to fight
for, to win, and to possess the Divine Fields of Perfection.
IN BIRTH, DEATH, OLD AGE, AND SICKNESS --- Every
physical body in the world, goes through these
modifications; and each one of them is an inlet for fresh
sources of sorrow. Birth, growth, decay, disease and death
are the tragic destinies of all living equipments. In all
these stages of our metamorphosis, to constantly
recognize pain is to feel an impatience with it. This sense
of revolt against pain is the fuel that drives the seekers
faster and faster to seek the Peaks of Perfection.
MOREOVER:
10. Non-attachment; non-identification of Self with son, wife,
home and the rest; and constant even-mindedness on the
attainment of the desirable and the undesirable. . .
NON-ATTACHMENT --- The mind's sticking on to the
various objects of the world with extreme liking for them
is called attachment. It is the mental contacts with the
world-outside that bring agitations into the mind. It
dances a number to the tune of death to which the finite
objects of the world most often dance. Fire in itself cannot
burn, but a child gets its fingers burnt, not because of the
930

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

fire but because its fingers, propelled by a force called
desire, come in actual CONTACT with fire.
ABSENCE OF EXCESSIVE LOVE FOR CHILD, WIFE,
HOME AND THE LIKE --- Excessive love, or affection, is
an intense form of attachment to another. It consists in our
total identification with the object of our affection. The
lover loses his personal identity in his identification with
the beloved to such an extent, that he is happy or
sorrowful when she lives in joy or suffers from pain. Such
an intimate relationship is generally met with in the
attachment of a mother to its child.
To build a wall of discrimination around our inner
personality and to keep such disturbances away is to
discover the equipoise in ourselves --- without which no
progress or growth is ever possible.
With a little practice, this evenness of mind can be
maintained unbroken in all situations of life --DESIRABLE and UNDESIRABLE. A human mind,
relieved from its pre-occupations with its own present
attachments and affections, unintelligent though they be,
will discover in itself a tremendous amount of surplus
energy conserved, which might flow into dangerous
channels unless rightly directed.
THE RIGHT CHANNELLING OF THIS NEWLY
DISCOVERED ENERGY IS INDICATED BELOW:
931

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

11. Unswerving devotion unto Me by the YOGA of nonseparation, resorting to solitary places, distaste for the society of
men. . .
Perhaps compelled by the nature of Arjuna, a man of
action, or perhaps forced by the very spirit of the reformer
in the Yogeshwara, the Divine Song, as it comes to us, is the
most practical textbook on Self-rediscovery. The moment
the Geeta-Acharya advises his disciple to develop any
given mental or intellectual beauty, he always suggests a
practical method by which this can actually be
accomplished.
If a seeker tries to develop in himself the virtues described
in the previous three stanzas --- not only in his inward life
but also in all his contacts with the world around him, it is
certain that he, an ordinary man of the world, will thereby
conserve in himself a lot of energy. This stanza describes
the right application of this conserved energy in proper
channels so as to profit thereby and gain a better Selfunfoldment.
UNFLINCHING DEVOTION TO ME --- Concentration is
the focussing of the mind upon a particular point to the
exclusion of all mental excitements and agitations. This
steadiness in contemplation may be destroyed by causes
arising at two different points --- either in the individual's
own mind or in the object contemplated upon. Unless
both are steady, concentration cannot be successful. If our
932

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

devotion wavers from idol to idol, then our practice of
concentration will get unsteady, because the point-ofattention becomes ever-changing. Therefore, it is said that
unflinching devotion towards Me, the Self, is one of the
conditions necessary for steady progress and growth in
Yoga.
BY THE YOGA OF NON-SEPARATION --- Undivided
attention and enthusiasm in the mind of the devotee is
another condition that will accomplish better
concentration. Otherwise the mind may revolt against its
own devoted self-application, and will, either partially or
wholly, wander away into its own delusory
enchantments. A certain amount of steadiness of purpose
is to be maintained by the mind. Wild imaginations and
futile day-dreaming are the preoccupations of only a
disintegrated mind.
The typical expression used here by Shri Krishna to
indicate the abject and despicable vacillations of the
human mind at the seat of Yoga clearly shows the force
with which he wants to condemn such vacillations. He
says, the mind should be "unprostituting" with its pointof-contemplation. Prostitution denotes an attitude of
selling away one's own capabilities and beauties for the
sake of some paltry profit heedless of the higher bonds of
faithfulness and chastity. A mind, wedded to the Lord, is
a mind at faithful contemplation. The warning "not to
prostitute" is indeed very powerful to express that the
point-of-concentration should not be at a crowd of deities
933

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

or a host of ideas, but must faithfully serve some chosen
single ideal.
Similarly, the other powerful expression used in the
stanza is "the Yoga of non-otherness" (Ananya-Yoga).
Inspired as He is, the Yogeshwara coins a new and
powerful phrase on the spur of the moment to bring a new
fire into his re-interpretation of the ancient Hindu way of
life and techniques of self-culture.
Such an integrated life of stable mind, and steady
contemplation upon a firm ideal is impossible, unless the
practitioner works in a conducive environment. This is
prescribed in the two indirect advices (a) TO RESORT TO
SOLITARY PLACES and (b) TO DEVLOP A DISTASTE
FOR THE CROWDED SOCIETY LIFE. The more
integrated the personality grows and the more maddening
becomes its enthusiasm for the quest of that which is dear
to its heart, the more it automatically lives alone in itself
away from the noisy crowd. This is true of every thinker -- be he a poet, be he a scientific research-scholar or be he a
man with an acute problem. Whenever the mind is
fascinated by an enchanting ideal, it loses all its contact
with other preoccupations and becomes wedded faithfully
to its own all-absorbing theme of interest.
Thereafter --- just a poet lives in his own world, just as the
scientist is a solitary man even in the market-place --- the
devotee also enters a cave of his own experiences and he
walks alone in the world. He hates other thoughts
934

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

entering his mind, and so lives alone in himself. These two
terms should not be misunderstood as physical escapism
into a tomb-like solitude, or as a physical aversion to the
society of men.
MOREOVER:
12. Constancy in Self-knowledge, perception of the end of true
knowledge --- this is declared to be "knowledge, " and what is
opposed to it is "ignorance. "
In this concluding stanza of this section, explaining the
various essential qualifications in a seeker, the Lord adds
to the aforesaid list EIGHTEEN qualifications, Two more
items, viz., "constancy in Self-knowledge" and
"understanding the end of the true Knowledge."
CONSTANCY
IN
SELF-KNOWLEDGE
--The
Knowledge of the Self is to be lived and not to be merely
learnt. If the Self is one everywhere and the Self alone is
real, the seeker should try to live as the Self at all levels of
his personality. The constancy of living the 'Spiritualknowledge' at all levels of one's contacts with the worldoutside, is one of the unavoidable practices a seeker
should always keep up.
UNDERSTANDING THE END OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE -- To remember constantly the goal of our endeavour is to
add more enthusiasm to our activities. Sincerity of
935

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

purpose in, and undying devotion to, any endeavour can
be had only if the seeker is thrilled by the vision of the
goal that he has to reach. Thus, the "end" should be kept in
view. Liberation (Moksha) from all our imperfections and
limitations, is the "end" striven for by all spiritual seekers.
The attributes are declared to be "Knowledge" because
they are conducive to the final Realisation of the Self.
A train in full steam waiting for the signal at a platform, is
generally described as "Madras is ready to leave now." In
the language of the Railway Station, it is usual to say --"Delhi is expected," "Calcutta is late," "Bombay has left,"
etc. In each of these cases only the train leaving for, or
coming from, these various cities is meant. Similarly here,
the very qualities are called the "Knowledge" (Jnana)
because, once these qualities have been fully developed,
the mind so cultivated becomes the ready vehicle to go
forward and it is easier to reach the goal, the Pure
Knowledge of the Self.
WHAT IS THAT WHICH HAS TO BE KNOWN BY THE
KNOWLEDGE? IN ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION IT IS
SAID:
13. I will declare that which has to be "known" knowing which
one attains to Immortality --- the beginningless Supreme
BRAHMAN, called neither being nor non-being.

936

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

After explaining, in the previous section of five verses, the
various secondary or auxiliary steps-in-aid for
"Knowledge," the Lord promises that He will explain
"WHAT IS TO BE KNOWN." There are critics who allege
that though Krishna, the teacher, promises that He will
explain "WHAT IS TO BE KNOWN," He does not directly
do so, but merely gives an elaborate description of what is
the RESULT of gaining such a "Knowledge." This criticism
is unfair. The glorification of the result of "Knowledge"
can create in the hearer a greater desire to realise it.
KNOWING WHICH, ONE ATTAINS THE IMMORTAL -- Mortality is the destiny of matter. Identifying with the
finite, the Immortal Spirit Itself is conditioned by matter
and suffers the delusory sense of finitude and mortality.
To rediscover the Spiritual Nature in itself and to live that
glory is to end the fearful concept and experience of death,
and to enter into a field of joyous Spiritual Nature. This is
the goal, for accomplishing which, our inner-equipments
of meditation are to be properly tuned up by the
disciplines already described.
WITHOUT BEGINNING, THE HIGHEST BRAHMAN
(Anaadimat-param) --- A beginning can be conceived and
calculated only with reference to what is the substratum of
all, which substratum must be existent even before Time.
Thus, the Supreme is always considered as
"beginningless." From the Supreme even Time is born.

937

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Supreme Consciousness, which is the "illuminator" of
all experiences and which exists, transcending all realms
of experiences, cannot be caught within the web of our
perceptions --- It being the very Perceiving-Principle in all
equipments. With reference to It, everything else is an
"object." It is the one Subject, and since it cannot be
perceived, felt or thought of, It is not said to be existent
(Sat).
Nor can Truth be defined as non-existent, such as the skyflower or man's tail, for It manifests as the world.
Therefore, Truth can be defined only as "neither sat nor
asat." The Supreme Brahman cannot be characterised either
positively or negatively.
Shankara says that "Brahman cannot be existent (Sat) as it
belong to no GENUS, nor possesses any qualities, but at
the same time It shows Itself to be not asat by manifesting
Itself through living bodies."
In fact these concepts of "Sat" and "Asat" are judgements of
the human mind and intellect. The Consciousness that
illumines these judgements is the Self. The illuminator and
the illumined cannot be one and the same. Therefore, the
one Subject, the Brahman, as opposed to all 'objects,'
cannot be either Existent or non-Existent, because 'Sat' and
'Asat' are two types of thought-waves, and the Self
illumines them both. That Brahman is "NEITHER BEING,
NOR NON-BEING" is all that the scriptures can declare.
938

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DESCRIBING THE ALL-PERVADING SELF CONSCIOUS
PRINCIPLE, WE HAVE THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
14. With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads and
mouths everywhere, with ears everywhere, He exists in the
world, enveloping all.
WITH HANDS AND FEET EVERYWHERE --- It is easier
to describe an unmanifest power for the comprehension of
students of lesser calibre, when the unknown principle is
defined in terms of the known. Though the hands and legs
of the living creatures are made up of inert matter, they
seem to be quite conscious and vital in their movements.
This Principle of Consciousness, functioning behind them
all, everywhere, is one and the same Self, the Supreme
Brahman, indicated by the expression "POSSESSING
HANDS AND FEET EVERYWHERE."
Every eye, head and mouth functions in the world
because of the Life that pulsates through it. Life is one
everywhere. Therefore, that Life Principle is described
here as "EVERYWHERE POSSESSING EYES AND EARS
AND MOUTHS." All activities of perception, feeling and
thinking are successively pursued only as long as Life
presides over the body, and therefore, the One Life is
defined here as "EVERYWHERE POSSESSING EYES,
ETC."

939

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THAT EXISTS PERVADING ALL --- If this Principle of
Consciousness is defined as functioning through known
physical equipments, the student may doubt that Life, like
stars studding the sky, expresses itself only wherever
equipments function. To remove this fallacious idea, it is
rightly said that the Truth, the Principle of Consciousness,
"EXISTS PERVADING ALL." This is reminiscent of the
famous hymn to the Cosmic-man (Purusha Sooktam) in the
Rig Veda.
CONTINUING THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ETERNAL
TRUTH THE LORD SAYS:
15. Shining by the functions of all the senses, yet without the
senses; unattached, yet supporting all; devoid of qualities, yet
their experiencer. . .
One of the ways of defining the indefinable Supreme, the
subject in the seeker himself, is to indicate It in a language
of contradiction, which, without confusing the intellect,
tickles it to a special kind of activity, thereby facilitating
the realisation of the Eternal. The language of
contradiction is the characteristic feature of all scriptural
text-books. Hasty readers of the Scriptures quote these
lines to justify their scepticism, or atheistic tendencies.
This stanza is met with in the Upanishads also.
SEEMING TO POSSESS THE FUNCTIONS OF ALL
SENSES YET DEVOID OF ALL SENSES --- The Self in us,
940

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

while functioning through the equipment, the sense
organs, and conditioned by them, looks as though It has
all the sense organs. But when we analyse, we have to
admit that the sense organs are material and that they
decay and perish, while the Consciousness --- functioning
in and through them and providing each of them with its
own individual faculty, is Itself Eternal, and Changeless.
The Truth, while functioning through the sense organs,
looks AS THOUGH It possesses them. But in fact, It has
Itself none of these faculties.
Electricity is not the light in the bulb, nor the heat in the
heater; yet while functioning through the bulb, or the
heater, and conditioned by them, the same Electricity
looks AS THOUGH it is light or fire.
DETACHED, YET UPHOLDING ALL --- This relationship
of "detached support" is not too easy for the initiate to
understand. But it is generally brought within our
comprehension by the great teachers of our country
through analogies. No wave is all the ocean; all the waves
put together are also not the entire ocean. We cannot say
the ocean is attached to the waves since the ocean is the
very nature of the waves and, though detached, all the
waves are always supported by none other than the ocean
itself. Cotton is in all cloth; cloth is not cotton. And yet, it
is the cotton in the cloth that "supports" the cloth.
Similarly, the world of plurality is not Consciousness. Yet
Consciousness supports it. Between the ghost and the
941

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

post, no attachment is ever possible and yet, the post alone
is the "support" of the ghost --- as the waking mind alone
can support the "dreams."
WITHOUT GUNAS, YET ENJOYING ALL GUNAS --- The
moods in which, and influences under which, human
minds come to play and experience themselves are called
"gunas." These are influences that govern the mind and yet
they are the objects of realisation or perception for the
Conscious Self. A live mind alone can experience these
influences. Consciousness conditioned by the mind is the
Ego (Jiva), and is the experiencer (Bhoktri) of the guna.
Unconditioned by the mind, in Its own nature, It is the
Absolute.
Thus, in the stanza, the Self, as the Absolute, is described
as beyond the sense organs, mind and intellect and
detached from everything and without any relation to the
various gunas.
But the same Self, conditioned by the sense organs, looks
AS THOUGH possessing them all, and proves AS
THOUGH It is the sustainer of them all, and expresses
Itself AS THOUGH It is the experiencer of all the gunas.
NOT ONLY THIS, BUT THE SELF, FUNCTIONING IN
AN INDIVIDUAL, IS THE ONE SELF IN ALL:

942

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

16. Without and within (all) beings, the 'unmoving' and also
the 'moving' ; because of its subtlety unknowable; and near and
far away --- is That.
The all-pervasiveness of the Principle of Consciousness is
indicated here in the inimitable style borrowed from the
Upanishads.
WITHOUT AND WITHIN ALL THINGS --- The
Conscious Principle that bursts Itself into activity through
the various individualised equipments is all-pervading
and is, therefore, in an unmanifest condition. It is present
even where no special equipment is available. Even
though we can listen to our national radio broadcasts only
through available receiving sets, we cannot say that there
are no electrical sound-waves in places where there are no
receiving sets. Where there is a body, mind and intellect
ready to function, there, no doubt, is the expression of
Consciousness. But Consciousness is All-pervading not
only within the equipment but even outside it.
The phrase quoted can also be interpreted as 'WITHOUT
THE BEINGS AND YET WITHIN THEM ALSO.'
Something like this: the ocean is without the waves and is
something other than the waves and, yet, the very mass of
each wave is nothing but the ocean itself.
MOVING AND UNMOVING --- All that moves of its own
volition is "alive" and that which has no motion falls
under the category of the "inert". This phrase is sometimes
943

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

explained as "UNMOVING AND YET MOVING,"
wherein the Truth, in Its Absolute nature is motionless --there is no place where It can move since It is All --- yet,
conditioned by the things moving, IT LOOKS AS
THOUGH it has movement. SITTING in a bus you can
TRAVEL a long distance; yourself only sitting! Thus the
bus travels, and therefore, in yourself though there is no
motion, yet you, conditioned by (meaning, carried by) the
bus, are the traveller.
Thus there is an Eternal, All-perfect Principle, revelling as
the very core in our personality, which is not only within
but which is everywhere --- without which no activity is
ever possible, and so, which is in every activity. It is
manifested everywhere. Then how is it that we are not
able to perceive It, or feel It, or intellectually comprehend
It? --- "BECAUSE OF ITS INCOMPREHENSIBLE
SUBTLETY."
The grosser the thing, the more perceptible it is. Earth can
be smelt, can be tasted, can be seen, can be heard. Water
cannot be smelt. Fire cannot be tasted. Air cannot be seen.
Space has only sound as its property.
Cause is always subtler than effect. Space itself being a
gross product, it must have a cause. That which is the
cause for Akasha is the Eternal Substratum, from which all
the Elements have arisen. Consciousness being thus the
"subtlest of the subtle," pervading even Akasha, It is
944

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

incomprehensible to the gross equipments of thought,
feeling and perception.
IT IS FAR AND NEAR --- Limited and conditioned things
can be defined by their location in space as "here" or
"there." And with reference to their distance from the
observer, we can say they are near or far. But that which is
All-pervading must be at once "here" and "there." And
therefore, it is NEAR AND FAR. This phrase also has been
sometimes interpreted as "FAR AND YET NEAR." "FAR":
in its Transcendental Absolute nature the Truth is FAR
AWAY from all the hallucinations of names and forms,
which, in their aggregate, constitute the Universe, but at
the same time as Existence, Truth exists in every name and
form: "NEAR."
In short, this verse, in its staggering beauty arising out of
its deliberate language of contradiction, shakes the reader
from his intellectual complacency and whips him up to
reflect and to realise that the Absolute Reality is at once
transcendent and immanent.
THIS BRAHMAN, WHICH CAN BE REALISED WITHIN
OURSELVES AS SELF, IS ONE AND THE SAME IN ALL,
AND REVELS AS THE SELF IN ALL. THIS IS
EXPLAINED BELOW:

945

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

17. And undivided, yet He exists as if divided in beings; That is
to be known as the Supporter of Beings; He devours and He
generates.
UNDIVIDED, AND YET, IN BEINGS, IT EXISTS AS IF
DIVIDED --- Electricity is All-pervading, and yet,
conditioned by the bulb it manifests as effulgence at the
filament. So too, though the Paramatman is All-pervading,
It individualises itself as special manifestations only at
points where equipments are available. Though space is
one, it can manifest as room-space, pot-space etc., only
when seemingly conditioned by the four walls of the
room, or the pot.
IT IS THE SUPPORTER OF ALL, DEVOURING AS WELL
AS GENERATING THEM --- The post is the supporter of
the ghost. It "creates" the ghost vision and "devours" it.
The earth is the supporter of all plants. It creates and it
devours them all. The ocean is the supporter of all waves,
waves are born from the ocean, and they are devoured by
the same ocean. Similarly, Truth is that solid Omnipotent
Substratum upon which is projected the world-ofplurality by the deluded mind and intellect; and when the
mind and intellect are transcended, the vision of samsara
gets devoured in the very experience of the Tranquil, just
as, on waking, the dream merges into the essence of the
waker's mind.
IT IS TO BE KNOWN --- The theme of all the discussions
in the previous stanzas (Stanza 13 onwards) was "THAT
946

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHICH IS THE KNOWABLE." This is to be "known" by a
mind that has been prepared for it through the disciplines
advocated in the earlier section.
IF THERE BE THUS AN ALL-PERVADING TRUTH,
EVER PRESENT IN US, AND IF WE CANNOT
PERCEIVE OR EXPERIENCE THIS SELF, IT MUST BE
SURELY A PRINCIPLE OF DARKNESS. THIS IS NOT SO.
LISTEN:
18. That (BRAHMAN) , the Light-of-all lights, is said to be
beyond darkness; (It is) Knowledge, the Object-of-Knowledge,
seated in the hearts of all, to be reached by Knowledge.
Brahman, the illuminator in all, is the One Consciousness
by which everything is known intellectually, realised
intuitively, and experienced spiritually. Since the
Consciousness in us brings our various experiences within
our understanding and knowledge, it is generally
compared with light. To see an object, it is not only
sufficient that the object is in line with a healthy pair of
eyes, but the object must also be bathed in light. Taking
this experience in the outer world of cognition as an
illustrative analogy, within us too we must have some
"Light" to illumine, since we can see and have the
knowledge of the different types of emotions and
thoughts that arise and exist in our bosom. This Light-ofWisdom, by which we become aware of our own mental
947

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and intellectual conditions at any given moment, is called
the "Light" of the Soul, or the Self, the Consciousness.
By the "Light" of Consciousness, every thought is
brilliantly lit in the awareness of our life. Thus, it has
become a spiritual tradition to call Consciousness as
"Light."
The moment the student comes across such an expression,
he is apt to misunderstand it as the LIGHT he has
experienced in the world. The brilliance of the light
experienced in the outer-world belongs to the realm-ofobjects, and it cannot be the subject that is conscious of it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the teacher should indicate,
in some way, what exactly is meant by such familiar terms
as "the Illumination of the Soul," "the Effulgence of the
Self," "the Incandescence of the Consciousness."
LIGHT-OF-ALL-LIGHTS --- To indicate the Subject, we
have to negate the entire field-of-objects. Sources of light
such as the Sun, moon, stars, lightning or even fire, are
described as having no illumination at all in the blinding
luminosity of the Self. Therefore, Krishna indicates that
the Self, in each, is the "Light" which illumines all other
perceptible lights! Even the Sun, though it has light of its
own, is immaterial to the living world of beings, if the
Consciousness in them does not illumine it. If I am not
aware, but I am told by some wise-looking sage, that I
have a pair of horns, it does not matter to me, because
they are not available for my enjoyment, nor are they
948

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

useful in my life, as long as I am not aware of them. My
world can give me my quota of cherished joys and pains
only when I am conscious of it. Light, as a principle
manifested, can serve my world only when it comes into
my awareness. Thus, all sources of light are illumined by
my Consciousness. Therefore, the Self is indicated as the
Subject that experiences the entire world of objectified
light.
THAT IS SAID TO BE BEYOND DARKNESS --- Even
after the indication that the Self is Consciousness that
illumines all other Lights of the world, the impression of
Light, as an object of our experience is so powerful in our
finite intellect that the average student can still retain only
his "relative concept" of light. In the world outside, light,
in its empirical sense, is that which we comprehend as a
contrast to darkness. If there were no light, there would
have been no days; in the Sun there is no meaning for the
word light, since the Sun knows no darkness! Thus, to
indicate the Absolute nature of the Infinite "Light" of the
Soul, it is stated that it is beyond the concept of darkness;
it is Absolute Light, the Consciousness.
Even to say that THERE IS darkness, we must be
conscious of it. The "Light" of awareness is so subtle and
Absolute, that It illumines not only the various sources of
light in the world, but also the experience of darkness
itself! That which illumines both light and darkness must
be a factor that transcends both these experiences. Thus,
949

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Spirit is indicated as that which transcends even
darkness.
The second line indicates that the Spirit is (a) Knowledge
(Jnanam), (b) that which is to be known (Jneyam), and (c)
that which is to be reached by knowledge (Jnana-gamyam).
In short, this is the final experience that is to be gained for
which we have prepared ourselves through moral
perfections such as "humility," etc., (XIII-5 to 11) and have
tried to concentrate upon the "Knowledge" (XIII-12 to 17).
This is the point-of-concentration for the head and the
heart that have been already disciplined for the final flight
in meditation. The Consciousness that transcends our
experiences and illumines our life is the very goal in all
spiritual endeavours, at all times, and everywhere.
DWELLING IN THE HEART OF ALL --- If there is an
Infinite Light of Knowledge to be known --- without
which life is impossible, in the presence of which alone all
experiences can have a meaning and existence --- then this
Infinite Goal is certainly to be acquired and possessed.
Where am I to seek it? What pilgrimage must I undertake?
Am I capable of making an expedition? Probably, I am not
in possession of it today as it must be something to be
experienced yonder in some unknown time and place. To
negate all such misconceptions, it is boldly declared here
that this Infinite dwells in the hearts of all.
Philosophically, "heart" means the area in the mental zone
from where noble and pious thoughts spring forth. In an
950

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

atmosphere of goodness, when the intellect steadily
contemplates upon the "Light" that lies beyond darkness -- the Absolute Non-dual Self that exists, transcending all -- but also immanent in its subtle all-pervading nature --- It
can be contacted and realised, and therefore, the "heart" is
considered as the dwelling place of the Self.
The Consciousness functioning in the seekers' mind and
intellect, if lived and experienced by Itself, must give the
experience of the Infinite, just as by knowing the
composition of a minute particle of salt, the world of
sodium-chloride is understood.
SEEK THE "LIGHT" THROUGH DEVOTION: HERE
FOLLOWS A CONCLUDING REMARK FOR THE
THEME DISCUSSED SO FAR:
19. Thus the Field, as well as the knowledge and the knowable
have been briefly stated. Knowing this, My devotee enters into
My Being.
What has been described in this chapter so far is the whole
doctrine, the doctrine of the Vedas, taught in brief as the
doctrine of the Geeta. The FIELD described above (XIII-6
& 7) beginning with the 'Great Elements' and ending with
'Fortitude'; KNOWLEDGE comprising the moral and
ethical rules ordering our right relationship with the
world, (XIII-8 to 12), starting with 'humility' and ending
with 'the perception of the end of knowledge' and the
951

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

KNOWABLE described just now, (XIII-2 & 7), these have
been briefly dealt with.
Now the question is: Who among the seekers is really fit
for this great "Knowledge"? It is prescribed by the Lord
that His "DEVOTEES ALONE ARE FIT FOR MY STATE."
Devotion here is not merely an emotional surrender in
love unto the Lord, but an intellectual apprehension of the
Truth, through a correct discrimination between the 'Field'
and the 'Knower-of-the-Field.' One who is able to
recognise the one Vaasudeva, who is the vitalising
Conscious-Principle in all Fields-of-matter-envelopments
(VII-5), is the true devotee "WHO IS FIT FOR MY STATE"
(Mat Bhava).
THE "FIELD" AND THE "KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD"
TOGETHER IN THEIR COMBINATION PROVIDE US
WITH ONE WORD FOR THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE...
20. Know you that Matter (PRAKRITI) and Spirit
(PURUSHA) are both beginningless; and know you also that all
modifications and qualities are born of PRAKRITI.
Earlier Krishna had described the World-of-Matter
(Prakriti) as falling under two groups, the Higher and the
Lower. Both these are explained in this chapter as the
KNOWER and the FIELD. During the discussion of the
Higher and the Lower Prakritis, it was said that they
together constitute the source of Creation. Continuing the
952

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

same thought in this chapter, in a fresh phraseology as the
"Field" and its "Knower," it is repeated that they together
constitute the womb-of-all-beings.
Matter (Prakriti) and Spirit (Purusha) are both
beginningless. Matter and Spirit are the two aspects of
Ishwara, the Lord. As the Lord is Eternal, it is but natural
that His nature --- Matter and Spirit --- should also be
Eternal, meaning beginningless. It is these two, in their
inter-play, that project Creation, continue to preserve it,
and dissolve the Universe created by them. Thus, the play
of Matter and Spirit is the cause of samsara and the
Substratum for both of them is the Lord, the Light of
lights.
Subjectively, when the creative power in me, ordered by
my vasanas (avidya), comes to play in the field of its
expression, dynamised by its "Knower," it projects a world
of experience, which I maintain and destroy according to
the nature, the condition and qualities governing the
Matter-Spirit factors in me.
All forms and qualities are born of Matter. All forms and
emanations (vikaras) which have been explained (XIII-6
and 7) already and all qualities (gunas) such as those
which express themselves as pleasure, pain, delusion and
such other mental states, spring from Matter (Prakriti). In
short, 'Matter' is that out of which all forms and qualities
come into existence. All changes and modifications belong
to the realm of 'Matter' and the Atman is the Changeless
953

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Substratum (Kutasthah), in the presence of which, all these
changes take place.
WHAT THEN ARE THESE FORMS AND QUALITIES
WHICH ARE DESCRIBED HERE AS BORN OF
PRAKRITI?
21. In the production of the effect and the cause, PRAKRITI is
said to be the cause; in the experience of pleasure and pain,
PURUSHA is said to be the cause.
IN THE PRODUCTION OF CAUSE AND EFFECT --- The
'effects' mentioned here are thirteen in number and are
constituted of the five great elements, the five senses,
mind, intellect and ahamkara. The macrocosmic gross
elements in their gunas are themselves represented in the
microcosm as the five indriyas. We had discussed this in
the description of the Cosmic-Form of the Lord (Chapter
XI). These sense organs cannot bring their stimuli of the
outer world to the individual personality unless there is
the converging point of all the indriyas, called the mind.
In order to respond properly to the stimuli, there must be
a coordinating and understanding, discriminating and
reasoning principle that governs the mind; and that
principle is the intellect. In the world-of-objects,
constituted of the elements, in the realm of the mind and
in the responses sent out by the intellect, there must be a
constant sense of I-ness, born out of the individual's
954

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

identification with all that is mentioned above. This is
called the 'Ego.' All these thirteen items, together in their
aggregate, represent the 'effect' (karya), mentioned in the
stanza.
PRAKRITI IS SAID TO BE THE CAUSE --- All the abovementioned together constitute the world-of-matter. The
five elements in their combination become the entire
world-of-objects including the body, the senses, sensation
and the instrument-of-judgement. From the five Great
Elements down to the Ego, all items enumerated together
form the "world-of-objects" --- since all of them can be
perceived.
AS EXPERIENCING PLEASURE AND PAIN --- That
which perceives the entire world-of-objects and their
reactions upon the ego which is the individual's direct
reaction to the world, is the Self. The Light of
Consciousness is that which illumines the world-of-objects
outside and the instruments of perception, feeling and
thought within.
PURUSHA IS SAID TO BE THE CAUSE --- Pleasure and
pain are the reactions in our intellect. When desirable
objects in a conducive pattern reach our life, the
experience is called 'pleasure.' And the opposite sensation,
produced by undesirable objects, is called 'pain.' Every
experience, in its final analysis, is adjudged either as pain
or as pleasure. The Awareness in us illumines these. It
would be impossible to be conscious of the flow of
955

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

experiences without the Grace of the Consciousness.
Therefore, the Spirit (Purusha) is explained here as the
cause for the experiences in life. In short, Purusha is the
cause for samsara. The Spirit, functioning in a field as the
"Knower" of it, suffers the sorrows of samsara. He who
stands in the Sun suffers the heat; if he retires into the
shade, he enjoys its coolness.
THUS, IT IS SAID IN THE ABOVE THAT THE
"KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD"
(PURUSHA)
IS
THE
ENJOYER OF THE PLEASURE AND PAIN --- SAMSARA.
WHAT IS THIS SAMSARA DUE TO? --- THE LORD
SAYS:
22. The PURUSHA, seated in PRAKRITI, experiences the
qualities born of PRAKRITI; attachment to the qualities is the
cause of his birth in good and evil wombs.
PURUSHA RESTS SEATED IN PRAKRITI --- The Purusha
(Spirit) has no samsara. But the "Knower of-the-Field,"
Purusha, when It identifies Itself with the "Field" (Prakriti),
becomes the experiencer. He identifies with the body and
the senses which are the effects of Prakriti.
HE EXPERIENCES THE QUALITIES BORN OF
PRAKRITI --- The sensations arising out of the matterenvelopments (Prakriti) such as pleasure and pain, heat
and cold, success and failure etc., constitute the painful
shackles on the "Knower-of-the-Field." The destinies of
956

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Matter become the tragic experiences of the Spirit, not
because they are in the Spirit, but because the Spirit
unnecessarily makes an unhealthy contact, through its
own identification, with the realm of sorrow.
He not only experiences the joys and sorrows in life but
also develops a blind attachment to them and this is "THE
CAUSE FOR ITS BIRTH IN GOOD OR EVIL WOMBS."
"As its desire, so is its will" is a scriptural declaration of an
eternal truth. While living in the world, the "Knower-ofthe-Field" experiences the pleasures and joys interpreted
by the world-of-Matter and gets attached to them, and
thereby develops residual impressions (vasanas), and takes
to conductive fields where it can eke out its cherished
satisfaction through vivid experiences.
When the Spirit, eternally joyous and infinitely all-full,
orders a "Field" and identifies Itself with it, It becomes the
"Knower-of-the-Field" (Purusha). The Spirit, as Purusha,
suffers its own delusory samsara, because, having entered
the field in its pre-occupation with the world-of-objects,
and in its clinging attachment to the "Field," it looks, as
though it has forgotten its own nature divine. Thus,
'ignorance'(avidya), and attachment to the "Field," are the
two causes because of which the Satchidananda seems to
have become the miserable, bemoaning, tearful, samsarin.
The re-discovery of the Self and the awakening to our
spiritual nature would, therefore, be through the path of
(a) detachment from the "Field" and (b) experience of the
957

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Real-Knowledge; vairagya and viveka are the means for
regaining the God in ourselves.
THE LORD CONTINUES TO TEACH US DIRECTLY
WHAT THAT "SAVING KNOWLEDGE" IS:
23. The supreme PURUSHA in this body is also called the
Spectator, the Permitter, the Supporter, the Enjoyer, the great
Lord and the Supreme Self.
As a contrast to this deluded sorrowful "Knower-of-theField," Purusha, there is the Pure Spirit uncontaminated by
the "Field." The moon in the bucket is the reflected moon
and for every reflection that dances with the conditionings
of the reflecting surface, there must be a real object. The
reflection is always conditioned by the reflecting medium
while the object reflected is never contaminated by the
changes in the reflecting surface. It is completely
independent of all conditions.
The "Knower-of-the-Field" is "Knowledge" or Consciousness conditioned by the "Field." Naturally, therefore, there
must be a Knowledge, in fact totally unconditioned, which
appears conditioned, when it plays in the realm of its
conditionings.
Thus, in this stanza, Krishna mentions for the purpose of
his scientific analysis and investigation, two Purushas; the
LOWER, which has already been described and indicated
958

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

as the "Knower-of-the-Field," and the HIGHER, which is
the Pure Consciousness unconditioned by Prakriti. Both of
them function "in this body."
This Supreme Self is indicated in tems of what it looks like
in Its silent manifestations when the matter equipments
(Prakriti) are weaving their different patterns. When an
individual is completely deluded and totally unconscious
of the Self, in and through him the Infinite Divine
expresses Himself as though He is only an "onlooker"
(Upadrashtaa); that is to say when a person murders an
innocent victim, the Infinite All-powerful Lord expresses
through that criminal's vehicle only as a silent spectator of
it all (Upadrashtaa). When proper actions are undertaken,
the mind is in a quiet mood. When the individual actor is
not totally forgetful of the Self, in such a being, the
Supreme expresses Himself as a "Permitter" (Anumantaa).
When proper actions are done with full consciousness of
the Self and in a spirit of total surrender to the Lord, the
Lord is the "fulfiller" (Bhartaa). Such actions are filled with
success by His grace. He aids, as it were, the fulfilment of
all such activities.
When, with entire dedication unto Him the individual is
completely a Yoga-Yuktah, in his Eternal Conscious nature
(Nitya Chaitanya Swaroopa), It seems to be the very "enjoyer"
(Bhoktaa). The stanza concludes by saying that the great
Ishwara, the Lord of Lords (Maheshwara) is the Higher Self
in this very same body.
959

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

HOW DOES THE ONE WHO KNOWS THE HIGHER
SELF, UNCONDITIONED BY THE "FIELD," REACT IN
LIFE?
24. He who thus knows the PURUSHA and PRAKRITI
together with the qualities, in whatsoever condition he may be,
he is not born again.
In the previous stanza, it was said that the identification of
the Purusha with the "Field" is the cause for Its
participation in the tragic destinies of matter. If there were
no contact, indeed, the Purusha would have been a mere
observer of the world-of-matter without undergoing any
suffering or sorrow. But the Infinite plays the part of the
miserable mortal because of Its delusory imagination that
It is directly conditioned by the mental and intellectual
reactions.
These vivid experiences in the world outside leave
impressions, to fulfill which the Purusha is born again and
again either in the higher wombs of enjoyment or to suffer
among the lower manifestations.
But he who has realised in himself: (a) that which is the
Matter; (b) that which is the Spirit; (c) how the Spirit,
deluded by its own preoccupations, gets identified with
Matter and behaves as "Knower-of-the-Field" and also (d)
the mysteries of the gunas, under the influences of which,
960

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the equipments function --- he becomes a Man-ofWisdom.
To know a thing we must stand apart from it, whereas, if
we are ourselves involved in any situation, we cannot
understand it fully. To realise at once the world-of-objects,
the instruments of contact and their behaviour and
qualities, is to stand apart from them all --- and in that
state, the Spirit, the Substratum, is realised. Thus, to
recognise our own nature to be the absolute, infinite, Pure
Consciousness, is to end all misconceptions (avidya). To
one who has thus ended all avidya, there is no more any
reason to get completely identified thereafter with the
"Field-of-Matter." Therefore, it is said, such an individual
thereafter: "WHATEVER BE HIS CONDUCT, HE IS NOT
BORN AGAIN" --- that is to say, no new vasanas can be
created in him and the old vasanas functioning in the mind
and intellect have dropped away from him, since, in him
there is no more any false ego-centric contact with the
world outside.
It is the Jiva that creates more and more vasanas in the
mind, and through the mind, according to the vasanas, it
projects different equipments and different worlds of
experiences in order to eke out its desired quota of joy and
pain. That, in such an individual of Self-realisation no
vasanas are left over, that he will be in the embodiment
only so long as this body exists, that the Knower of
Brahman himself becomes the Infinite, and that all the
accumulated reactions of his actions perish at the moment
961

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of Self-realisation --- are all truths declared by the
Upanishads.
NOW THERE ARE SEVERAL 'PATHS' TO SELF
KNOWLEDGE AND THEY ARE MENTIONED HERE AS
FOLLOWS:
25. Some, by meditation, behold the Self in the Self by the Self;
others by the "YOGA -of-Knowledge" (by SANKHYA YOGA)
; and others by KARMA YOGA.
This realisation of the Self in its pure nature, undressed of
all its matter envelopments, is the final goal of spiritual
seeking and there are more 'paths' than one, prescribed for
this Divine Achievement. Integration of a human
personality must start from the point where an individual
finds himself to be at present. No education can be
successful unless the students are given graded lessons.
A totally disintegrated individual must also be given a
'path' which he can easily follow with his restless
equipment. Spiritual unfoldment cannot take place merely
because of an intellectual appreciation of the theory of
Perfection. Evolution actually takes place only when a
corresponding change in the very subjective life is
accomplished. Therefore, an active, intelligent and
enthusiastic participation of the seeker in controlling,
directing, and re-educating his thought-life is necessary --962

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

hence the difficulty in accomplishing inward spiritual
unfoldment in every individual.
The great spiritual scientists of the past, discovering ways
of evolving the entire mankind, consisting of different
types, evolved various "roads" --- all converging at the
same goal. Each 'path' is the fittest for the one who is
walking it. No 'path' can be said to be nobler than the
other. In a pharmacy there are different medicines; each
one serves a definite type of patient and the medicine
prescribed for a given disease is the fittest medicine for
that patient as long as his ailment continues.
The difference between the various seekers is the
difference in their mental equanimity and intellectual
equipoise. The lesser 'paths' are mainly meant for
purifying the inner equipments, and when the mind
becomes steady and concentrated, when the intellect is
redeemed from its wasteful habits of wrong imaginations,
then the equipments are ready for Higher flights through
the "Path-of-Meditation."
BY MEDITATION SOME BEHOLD THE SELF --MEDITATION CONSISTS IN "WITHDRAWING, BY
CONCENTRATION, ALL THE SENSE ORGANS AWAY
FROM THEIR RESPECTIVE SENSE-OBJECTS INTO THE
MIND, AND THEN WITHDRAWING THE MIND INTO
THE
INNER
INTELLIGENCE,
AND
THEN
CONTEMPLATING UPON THE HIGHEST." It is a
continuous and unbroken thought-flow, like a stream of
963

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

flowing oil. In order to pursue this path, naturally, the
individual must have a dynamic head and heart --- both
least disturbed by their own subjective defects.
To "behold" does not mean to see the Self as an object,
which would then mean something against the very
assertion of the scriptures. The Self is the "SUBJECT";
therefore, the term "behold" is used to mean only 'an
inward experience of a total subjective re-discovery.' The
experience is so vivid that it is comparable to our
unshakable knowledge of anything after we have once
objectively SEEN it ourselves.
BY THE SELF IN THE SELF --- The subjective experience
of the very core of our personality is accomplished by the
head in the pure heart. Shankara explains the portion: "By
meditation, the Yogins behold the Self, the Pure
consciousness, in the Self (Buddhi), by the Self --- by their
own intelligence, that is, by the Antahkarana, refined by
Dhyana." All sincere attempts at meditation with steady
mind-and-intellect, and the steady mental-pool of
thought, with its passions and vasanas subsided, and to an
extent, even eliminated, provides a clear reflected surface
in which the glory of the Self is seen reflected, and this is
recognised intuitively.
One may wonder why the same term is used to indicate
the instrument of recognition (Atmani), the subject
recognising it (Atmana) and object recognised (Atmanam).
The reason is, in the final realisation, it is experienced that
964

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the intellect, the mind, the seeker and the sought are all in
fact nothing other than the One Self. The waves, the
ripples, the foam are all nothing but the ocean. The
dreamer, the dreamt, and the dream are all nothing but
the waker's own mind. In this sense, in our scriptural lore,
we often find the term "Atman" used to indicate even our
outer-personalities brought about by our identifications
with the matter-envelopments in us.
This 'path' of quietening the mind, steadying the intellect
and with an integrated mind-and-intellect, contemplating
steadily upon the transcendental Self, is not a 'path' that is
available to all, as it calls forth certain mental and
intellectual perfections which are not commonly seen in
everyone. Those who have these qualifications are
considered as the highest type of aspirants. The seekers of
the best type --- who have developed in themselves a
sufficient detachment (vairagya) from the sense objects,
and a ready discrimination (viveka) to distinguish the
permanent from the impermanent --- alone can steadily
walk this Highest 'path'.
OTHERS BY THE 'PATH' OF SANKHYA YOGA --- In the
case of those who have not the required amount of
steadiness in mind and intellect --- not because of any lack
of aspiration but for want of right understanding of the
Goal (viveka) --- their sense of detachment (vairagya) waxes
and wanes. Naturally, sometimes they are good at
meditation, and at other times, they experience a
tremendous amount of restlessness and agitation. For such
965

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

seekers, the only remedy is a more intelligent and
enthusiastic study of the Shastras. The term 'Sankhya'
means "the sequence of logical thought through which we
reach a definite philosophical conclusion, unassailable by
any doubts any more.
This deep study and reflection (vichara), since it provides
the seeker with a better understanding of the text, and
therefore, a deeper conviction of the goal, will discover for
him a very healthy and steady self-application and a
divine equipoise in his meditation. Since vichara can safely
take us to the Yoga-of-Meditation, and help us to establish
ourselves therein, the very study of the Shastra and
reflections upon it (Sankhya) is here called as 'Yoga.' That
which ultimately takes one to Yoga is called Yoga, just as a
vehicle is often named by the destination to which it is
proceeding. "9. 30 is Delhi departure time" does not mean
that at that time the capital-city is packing off from our
country and going to the Nicobar Islands! It only shows
that a train will be leaving for Delhi at that scheduled
time. The seekers, who are not fit for steadily following
the 'path' of deep meditation, are advised to steam
themselves up by the Sankhya Yoga: by the 'path' of deep
study and reflection.
OTHERS AGAIN BY KARMA YOGA --- There is still
another type of seekers for whom even study of the
Shastra and effective reflections upon it becomes almost
impossible because their inward personality is so much
poisoned by the existing hosts of sensuous vasanas. They
966

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

are in a state of mental agitation in which no dynamic and
effective meditation is possible. The instrument is not fit
for it, and therefore, the selfless activity in a spirit of Yajna
is prescribed for them. When the "Path-of-Action" is
pursued for a time, as contemplated in the Geeta (III-30),
the existing vasanas exhaust themselves and more and
more quietude and tranquillity are experienced by the
seeker. A mind, thus steadied, is fit for delving into the
deeper significances of the mantras, and when the
conviction of the goal is intensified in the individual, as a
result of these reflections, his meditation gathers a
momentum and a dash which can take him to the Highest
Peaks.
In short, seekers with the noblest Sattwic qualities need
only practice meditation; seekers of a slight Sattwic
temperament with a large share of agitations, must
develop the "creative stillness" in themselves through the
"Path-of-Perfection"; those who are suffering from the
worst mental oscillations, created by the vasanadisturbances, must through Karma Yoga, develop Sattwic
traits, nurture and nourish them through reflection, and
thus gain enough Sattwic dynamism and steady
meditation.
IN THAT CASE, WHAT 'PATH' IS PRESCRIBED FOR
THOSE WHO ARE COMPLETELY STEEPED IN
"TAMAS" --- MENTAL AND INTELLECTUAL INERTIA?
THEY TOO ARE SERVED. LISTEN:
967

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

26. Others also, not knowing this, worship, having heard of it
from others; they too, cross beyond death, if they would regard
what they have heard as their Supreme Refuge.
The previous verse defines the 'path' that is conducive to
the best type of students (uttama adhikarins), and to the
mediocres and weaklings (madhyama adhikarins). To the
low class of aspirants too, the Geeta Acharya prescribes a
'path'.
HAVING HEARD FROM OTHERS --- There are some
who are not capable of meditation. They have neither the
intellectual capacity to follow the logical thoughts in any
philosophy, nor the necessary inward equipoise to follow
the "Path-of-Action." Even such people can evolve, though
they are ignorant of the 'paths,' if only they worship the
Principle of Truth on the strength of what they have heard
from others.
THEY TOO GO BEYOND DEATH --- If such people are
capable of constantly worshipping the Lord as they have
been instructed by other devotees, they too can transcend
the finite life of plurality and experience the Changeless.
The term 'DEATH'here, should not be understood as
meaning only the phenomenon of death that happens to a
personality expressed in a body. The term is used in its allembracing significance, indicating in its expanse of
meaning, the total principle-of-change as experienced by
any given human mind-and-intellect. As long as we
968

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

identify with the body --- gross, subtle or causal --- the
experiences can only be of the finite. To experience the
Infinite, is to enter the status of Immortality, beyond the
thraldom of death.
This verse, while explaining the efficacy of prayer and
worship, even when unscientifically performed, is not
recommending that all the methods are equally efficient,
but it is only emphasizing the idea that, in the practice of
worship, correct knowledge shall surely provide a better
guarantee of success. If seekers can progress upon the
authority of others' instructions, when they are themselves
ignorant, Sankara exclaims: "How much more so then can
they progress, who can independently appreciate the
Shastra texts and discriminate?"
THROUGH THESE VARIOUS 'PATHS' AVAILABLE,
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE ULTIMATE GOAL TO BE
REALISED? LISTEN:
27. Wherever any being is born, the unmoving or the moving,
know you, O best of the Bharatas, that it is from the union
between the "Field" and the "Knower-of-the-Field. "
All things in the world that are born --- both the world of
inert matter (unmoving) and the world of conscious
beings (moving) --- arise neither from the "Field" (Prakriti)
nor from the "Knower-of-the-Field" (Purusha). The source
is from the marriage of Prakriti and Purusha. This
969

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

combination of Matter and Spirit is not an accomplished
union but is only a mutual super-imposition.
In every super-imposition, a delusion is recognised upon a
substratum: the ghost in the post. Not only the form and
all attributes of the ghost come to be projected upon the
post, but the post also lends its existence to the nonexistent ghost. As a result of their mutual exchange, we
find that the non-existent ghost comes to exist in our
experience, while the existing post becomes a non-existent
ghost with illusions of physical limbs and ghastly
behaviour. This process, which is a trick of the human
mind, is called mutual super-imposition. In the Pure
Consciousness there is no Field-of-Matter. The Field-ofMatter has neither existence, nor sentiency. But the spirit
plays in the "Field" (Prakriti), and becomes the "Knowerof-the-Field" (Purusha), and when this Purusha works in
Prakriti the combination breeds the entire phenomenal
Universe constituted of the moving and the unmoving.
When, through careful discrimination, we successfully
discover this play in ourselves, the vision of plurality
recedes and we understand that the ultimate Truth is the
substratum on which both Prakriti and Purusha play.
Ordinarily, I am a quiet man. But sometimes my heart's
passion is endless. When I identify myself with the
passion in my heart, I play in the world as the passionate
man and perform deeds for which I myself might later on
regret! Now in this example, the regret, and the regretting
970

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

person, the passion and passionate entity --- all of them
revel in me. They all belong to me but I am not they! Yet,
when I identify myself with them, I become the
perpetrator of the regrettable actions and the passionate
actor in me comes to brood over what has happened, and
so it suffers. Similarly, the Self contains matter possibilities
--- the Self being Paripoorna. To project matter and to
identify with it, is to become the Purusha, and the Purusha,
maintaining Itself in the Field-of-Matter so projected,
becomes the source of the entire samsara. To analyse
closely with discrimination, to detach courageously with
vitality, to carefully and heroically live as an observer of
all that is happening within, not allowing ourselves to be
misled by our own imaginations --- is the method of
realising the Perfection in ourselves.
THIS SELF, WHICH IS THE SUBSTRATUM OF A GIVEN
'PURUSHA' AND 'PRAKRITI,' IS ITSELF THE ONE SELF
EVERYWHERE AS INDICATED BELOW:
28. He sees, who sees the Supreme Lord existing equally in all
beings, the unperishing within the perishing.
HE SEES, WHO SEES THE SUPREME LORD --- The
Supreme Lord (Parameshwara), on whom the "Field" and
the "Knower-of-the-Field" play the game of delusory
identification and consequently suffer the endless sorrows
of samsara, is the Eternal Principle of Pure Existence. The
one factor that binds all the waves of the ocean together,
971

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

that EXISTS in all waves and SUPPORTS the entire selfdestroying and mutually procreating play of the waves, is
the ocean. Similarly, the Substratum that supports all is
the Supreme Lord "remaining the same in all beings."
THE UNDYING IN THE DYING --- To a superficial
observer, the world is a field of perpetual change, a
constant death. Nothing remains the same even for a
moment. Things change themselves and naturally, their
relationships with each other also change. This welter of
change is what we observe in the world of perceptions, in
the realm of feelings and in the field of thoughts. In terms
of this world-of-plurality, and its ever-changing nature,
the Absolute Truth is indicated as the Changeless
Platform upon which these changes are staged.
Everything in the phenomenal world is subject to
modifications such as birth, growth, disease, decay and
death. The entire chain of modifications starts with birth;
that which is born alone can grow, and ultimately passing
through the various changes, reach the final change in
"death." When the Supreme Lord is indicated here as the
"Deathless," all other modifications are also denied in
Him. This Changeless Consciousness, that supports all
changes, is the undying Principle that illumines the everdying world-of-plurality. The gold in the ornaments is the
only constant factor; out of the same bar of gold various
types of ornaments are made and destroyed to make other
types of ornaments. The shape and the size of the
972

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ornaments change, but the changeless factor in them all, is
pure gold.
He who is capable of recognising the Supreme Lord
(Parameshwara), who revels everywhere as the Pure Spirit,
in all names and forms, who changes not, while the outer
equipments change; he alone is the one who sees what is
really to be seen. In this stanza, the term 'seeing' is a
phrase borrowed from our ordinary world-of-perception,
but used in the sense of "spiritual Self-realisation."
The physical world is recognised and perceived through
our physical equipments. Emotions in the world around
us are felt and recognised by our minds. The world of
ideas is comprehended by our intellect. The Spiritual
Substratum in the Universe of beings and things can be
apprehended only from the spiritual centre in ourselves.
Just as the EYES cannot see THOUGHTS, so too the
equipments of perceptions, feelings and thoughts cannot
recognise the Spirit that is subtler than them, and It lies
transcending all of them.
HE ALONE SEES WHO SEES THIS --- This is a very
powerful and direct assertion. Everybody sees, but not the
Real. Wrong perceptions indicate mal-adjustments in the
instruments-of-perception. Hallucinations and illusions,
false imaginations and delusory projections of the mind
veil the reality of the thing observed. Therefore, here the
Yogeshwara asserts that he who recognises this harmony of
the one Truth, this thread of Reality, which holds all
973

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

experiences together, which is one in all beings,
experiences the Truth to be realised in the world. Others
see, and yet do not see; he alone sees who realises this
Supreme Lord, which is the Imperishable.
TO EULOGISE THE RIGHT KNOWLEDGE BY
INDICATING THE RESULT OF ITS POSSESSION, THE
LORD CONTINUES:
29. Indeed, he who sees the same Lord everywhere equally
dwelling, destroys not the Self by the Self; therefore, he goes to
the Highest Goal.
Vedanta preaches not so much the negation of the world,
as the re-evaluation of things, beings and happenings
constituting the world. Generally we perceive our own pet
ideas and emotions, coloured by our unsteady
understanding and changing emotions. To see the world,
not through these equipments, but with the clear eye of
wisdom, is to recognise perfection and bliss, divinity and
sanctity in the very drab and dreary world of today,
amidst its very sorrows and ugliness. Erroneous
perception of the Reality, through maladjusted
equipments, is the perception of the world, which, in its
turn is throttling the individual perceiving it.
When the Pure Consciousness looks upon Itself through
the refracting medium of matter envelopments, It
perceives, as it were, a world-of-plurality, and the
974

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

pluralistic world grins and dances, whistles, shrieks and
howls --- ever ugly, stinking and sweating --- according to
the maddening changes that take place in the very
equipments (FIELD) through which the ego (KNOWEROF-THE-FIELD) happens to gaze. To re-discover the
spiritual Reality, the Supreme Lord, in and through this
horrid welter of change and sorrow is to end all our
agitations and unprofitable aims and exertions, "FOR HE
SEES THE LORD DWELLING IN EVERY PLACE ALIKE."
Such an individual, in his own experienced wisdom, no
more suffers from sorrow or fear. When the post is
realised, the dread created by the ghost is ended.
HE DESTROYS NOT THE SELF BY THE SELF --- Earlier
the Lord has explained when exactly the self becomes the
enemy of the Self (VI-5 & 6). Whenever the lower egocentric individuality is not available for sure guidance by
the Higher-Principle-of-Wisdom in ourselves, the lower
becomes our enemy. When a vehicle is no more under our
control, it will cease to be of any service to us and
becomes, as it were, an engine of destruction. Similarly,
when the lower in us is not available for the guidance of
the Higher, the former turns out to be an enemy of the
latter. And in an individual who recognises and
experiences the one Parameshwara that revels everywhere,
the lower cannot fight against or shadow any longer the
glory of the Higher.
THEREFORE HE GOES TO THE HIGHEST GOAL --- The
true nature of the Self remains undiscovered due to the
975

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

non-apprehension of Reality (ajnana), or due to the misapprehension (mithya jnana) arising out of the nonapprehension. The non-apprehension of the one
Parameshwara everywhere, makes an individual act in the
world in a way which renders him incapable of
appreciating the glory of the Self in all other living beings.
Thus, he becomes a source of sorrow to the community of
living beings around him. The non-apprehension (ajnana)
creates a veil because of which, not only do we not
recognise the one Eternal Divine everywhere, but we also
identify ourselves with the body and the mind, and
behave as though they alone are real; in consequence,
sensuality, materialistic pursuits, and selfish satisfactions
become the only worthwhile objects or pursuits in our life,
which we destroy for ourselves and others. The state an
individual gains when both these, non-apprehension
(ajnana) and mis-apprehension (mithya-jnana) are ended, is
that Absolute experience, the experience of the Highest
Goal, and therefore, "HE GOES TO THE HIGHEST."
INDIVIDUALS ACT DIFFERENTLY, AND THEREFORE,
THE PARAMESHWARA, PLAYING BEHIND EACH
INDIVIDUAL MUST BE A SEPARATE SELF. TO
CONTRADICT THIS CONCEPT OF PLURALITY IN THE
SELF, IT IS SAID:
30. He sees, who sees that all actions are performed by
PRAKRITI alone, and that the Self is actionless.
976

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

If a caravan of motor vehicles, manufactured by different
companies, with different horse-powers, at different
periods of history, is put on the road, the performance of
each vehicle will be unique. We cannot conclude
therefrom that the petrol in each vehicle is of different
typical potencies. The same electrical energy illumines
different electric bulbs, manifesting different intensities of
incandescence at different points. The electricity is one;
the petrol is one; and yet the performance of the cars and
the light manifested in the bulbs are different from
equipment to equipment because of the very quality of the
equipments. This analogy can explain the wonderful idea
expressed in this stanza.
PRAKRITI ALONE PERFORMS ALL ACTIONS --- Matter
is the equipment that orders the types of action that
should manifest. If the mind is bad, the life expressed
through it will also be bad. All actions are according to the
types of desires entertained by the intellect. Thus, in the
presence of Spirit, the "equipments" (Prakriti) function,
and the Self (Atman), functioning in the "Field," called the
"Knower-of-the-Field" (Purusha), acts in the world outside.
When the "Knower-of-the-Field" leaves the "Field," there is
no more any activity in the "Field," nor is there any
activity for the Self Itself.
THE SELF IS ACTIONLESS (NOT ACTING) --- The Self is
all-pervading, perfect and, as such, there is no desire in It.
And where desires have ended, actions are impossible. In
the Infinite, there is no action, and the very many reasons
977

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

as to why there is no action in the Self, will be described
presently (XIII-32).
He who is capable of recognising how his own vehicles
function and realising that the Self in him is ever
actionless, is alone the right perceiver, who is recognising
and experiencing the "IMPERISHABLE AMIDST THE
PERISHABLE."
"HE
SEES
WHO
SEES."
The
manifestations of individuals are different from person to
person because of the differences in the composition and
make-up of the various equipments (upadhis), and, when
they are destroyed, all differences merge to express the
one Infinite experience, the Supreme Lord.
WHILE EXPLAINING THE SELF, AS THE SOURCE-OFALL-BEINGS, THE LORD INDICATES THE STATE OF A
MAN WHO CAN DECLARE THAT HE HAS HAD FULL
EXPERIENCE OF THE INFINITE ONE:
31. When he (man) sees the whole variety-of-beings, as resting
in the One, and spreading forth from That (One) alone, he then
becomes BRAHMAN.
A scientific investigation is complete only when the
phenomenon intellectually analysed, is applied physically
and brought within the limits of our observation.
When one has understood that the atoms are the physical
units of matter, one must also realise at once that these
978

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

atoms in different combinations of numbers and patterns
create the world of infinite forms and qualities. Similarly,
to know that the Self is the Ultimate Truth behind the
names and forms, is, in itself, only a partial knowledge.
The complete understanding of Life can arise only when
we, at once, understand how from the Self the endless
multiplicity of names and forms rise up and spread to
become the Universe.
Just as in our understanding we can comprehend all the
waves as inherent in the ocean, so too, a man of right
understanding
can
recognise
"THE
SEPARATE
EXISTENCE OF ALL BEINGS IN THE ONE." Once
having understood the ocean, we do realise how the
numberless waves rise from that one ocean; so too a man
of right understanding also realises "THE EXPANSION
OF PLURALITY FROM THAT ONE ALONE." Such
moments of complete understanding, wherein the Man-ofWisdom experiences the One Self within and without --enveloping and embracing, penetrating and nourishing
not only the depthless and the measureless Infinite, but
also the superficial world of pluralistic names and forms -- are the sacred moments when he has "BECOME
BRAHMAN."
The Self alone can recognise the Self. He who is
recognising the one homogeneous Self, he who is
experiencing that the Consciousness in him is one with the
homogeneous-mass-Consciousness everywhere, and he
who also understands how on his coming into the body
979

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

awareness, the world-of-plurality throws the mantle of its
magic upon the fair face of the Infinite and makes It look
ugly with all its perishable names and forms --- such a
person is of "True Wisdom" and "Right Perception." At
that moment, he has himself transcended his own
equipments and has come to identify himself with the
One-Consciousness-everywhere.
IF THE ONE SELF BE THE SELF IN ALL BODIES, THEN
IT MUST BE NECESSARILY ACTING AND EARNING
THE REACTIONS --- VASANAS. TO PROVE THE
FALLACY OF SUCH A CONCLUSION IT IS SAID:
32. Being without beginning, and being devoid of qualities, the
Supreme Self, the Imperishable, though dwelling in the body, O
Kaunteya, neither acts, nor is tainted.
Even though at Its touch It thrills the matter equipments
into various activities, the fact that the Spirit is actionless
is emphasised by the scriptures, and this is not an idea so
easy for early students of Vedanta to understand.
Therefore, the Upanishads have taken great pains to make
us understand that the All-full Infinite, being Onewithout-a-second in its All-pervasiveness, has nothing to
accomplish for Itself. Earlier we have discussed in the
Geeta: "it is Nature that acts" (V-14). This Spirit,
identifying Itself with "Field" (Prakriti), becomes the
"Knower-of-the Field" (Purusha) and it is this
"individualised ego" that acts and accomplishes.
980

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here we are given some logical reasons why the Infinite
Consciousness, "THOUGH DWELLING IN THE BODY,
NEITHER ACTS, NOR IS TAINTED." When the local
Judge, Shri Gopal Rao, condemns a murderer to be
hanged, the Judge is not considered as having committed
a murder; the individuality in the Judge can gain no taint.
Shri Gopal Rao in the chair acts as the Sessions Judge and
it is the Judge who has passed the death sentence.
HAVING NO BEGINNING --- That which has a cause
alone has a beginning. "No beginning," means "no cause."
Truth being "that from which everything comes," it is the
Uncaused Cause for all that has been created. That which
owes its existence to a CAUSE becomes itself an EFFECT,
and every EFFECT is nothing other than its CAUSE
"which has undergone a change." All effects are thus
changeable and things that are subject to change must
necessarily perish.
HAVING NO QUALITY --- That which has no change
cannot have any quality since that which has qualities is a
substance and all substances are perishable. The
Imperishable Infinite, THE CAUSE for everything, Itself
caused by nothing, must, therefore, be without any
quality.
THIS SUPREME SELF, IMPERISHABLE --- The Uncaused
Cause for the entire world of phenomena, the Paramatman,
which is devoid of qualities must necessarily be, by its
own logic, "Imperishable." The process-of-change,
981

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

happening in the properties and to the qualities of a thing,
is the phenomenon of its decay. That which is Changeless
cannot perish. And that which has no quality cannot
change!
Therefore, the Beginningless, the Quality-less, the
Imperishable Supreme Self, though living in the physical
structure, and thrilling the inner matter-field around each
embodied creature into the play of life, does not, in Itself,
and by Itself, act.
This is one of the subtle concepts in Vedanta which lesser
intellects must find rather difficult to grasp. This is a wellrecognised difficult portion in the Vedantic literature. But a
little effort at reflection can clear the confusions and
remove all the difficulties
HERE THE LORD GIVES SOME PARALLEL EXAMPLES
TO ILLUSTRATE THE ACTION-LESS-NESS OF THE
SELF AND ALSO THE QUALITY-LESS-NESS OF THE
SPIRIT IN ESSENCE, IN SPITE OF THE DISCORDANT
AND DEVLISH ACTIVITIES OF MATTER AROUND IT:
33. As the all-pervading ether is not tainted, because of its
subtlety, so too the Self, seated everywhere in the body, is not
tainted.
AS THE ALL-PERVADING AKASHA (SPACE) IS NEVER
SOILED --- Space is an example we can take to indicate
982

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the relationship of Spirit with Matter. Akasha means "that
which gives accommodation to things." In short, it is the
concept of pure Space. It is the subtlest of all gross
elements, and since greater subtlety implies greater
pervasiveness, Space pervades everything that is grosser
than it. A subtler thing cannot be conditioned by a grosser
factor --- the stone walls do not a prison make, nor iron
bars a cage, for the thoughts of the captive, being subtler
than the stone walls and iron bars, can penetrate them, --Akasha is the subtlest of all.
Space, being subtle, it allows everything to remain in it,
yet, nothing that it contains can contaminate it. The
Supreme Self, which is the very cause for the Akasha itself,
and therefore, subtler than it, "IT PREVADES ALL:
NOTHING PREVADES IT"... It cannot be contaminated by
anything that exists or happens in the world-of-plurality.
Murders committed in the dream cannot soil the hands of
the weaker! The bloody garb of the ghost cannot leave its
marks on the post. The mirage waters cannot wet even a
grain of sand in the desert. These are examples of
hallucinations, or delusory super-impositions. The world
of plurality being nothing but mis-apprehensions of
Reality arising out of the non-apprehension of the Real,
the realm-of-matter (Prakriti) and its activities cannot
contaminate and soil the Perfect and the Eternal.

983

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE SELF, THOUGH IT PERMEATES AND PREVADES
THE WHOLE BODY, IS NOT SOILED, JUST AS SPACE
CANNOT BE DIRTIED BY ALL THE
AMOUNT OF FILTH THAT IT MAY ACCOMODATE IN
ITSELF. THEN WHAT EXACTLY IS THE SPIRIT'S
FUNCTION IN THE BODY? LISTEN:
34. Just as the one Sun illumines the whole world, so also the
Lord-of-the-Field (PARAMATMAN) illumines the whole
"Field, " O Bharata.
Here is one of the most striking examples in our scriptural
literature, given to us by the Divine Charioteer. It conveys
to our intellectual comprehension the exact relationship of
the Consciousness, the Eternal Principle-of-Life, with
reference to the various worlds-of-matter and their
expressions. Just as the one Sun illumines the entire
Universe from afar, and at all times, so too the
Consciousness merely illumines the world-of-objects, the
body, the mind, and the intellect.
Though generally in our everyday talks we attribute the
ACTIVITY of lighting up the world of the Sun, we find on
close examination that we cannot attribute any such
ACTIVITY to the Sun. An action is that which has a
beginning and an end and it is generally undertaken to
fulfil a deep desire, or a silent purpose. The Sun does not
illumine the world in this sense of the term. On the other
984

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

hand, "light" itself is the nature of the Sun, and in its
presence
everything
gets
illumined.
Similarly,
Consciousness is of the nature of awareness and in Its
presence, everything becomes known --- illumined.
In the world there is only one Sun and it illumines
everything, good and bad, the vicious and the virtuous,
the ugly and the beautiful. And yet the Sun is not sullied
by the ugly, the vicious and the bad, nor is it blessed by
the good, the virtuous or the beautiful. So too, in our inner
life, the Ever-perfect and Joyous Consciousness functions
through the equipments and illumines them, but It never
gets contaminated by the sins of the mind, by the
perversions of the intellect, or by the crimes of the
physical body. It only illumines. This illumination of the
Self, playing upon our thoughts and emotions, gets
splashed to form the ever changing patterns of the
multiple individuals, with their everchanging behaviours.
THIS DOCTRINE OF THE "FIELD" AND THE
"KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD," BOTH PLAYING IN THE
SUPREME, DISCUSSED IN THIS CHAPTER IS
CONCLUDED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
35. They who, with their eye-of-wisdom come to know the
distinction between the "Field" and the "Knower-of-the-Field, "
and of the liberation from the "PRAKRITI of the being, " go to
the Supreme.
985

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

After explaining that the Spirit is the Illuminator, and that,
being the Illuminator, It cannot be tainted by the qualities
of the illumined, here Lord Krishna directly advocates that
man's life is fulfilled only when he, in his subtle
discrimination, successfully meditates upon and realises
the constitution, behaviour and relationship among the
"Field," "the Knower-of-the-Field," and the "Supreme Self"
in himself. This can be done only with a well-integrated
instrument, a combination of a fully developed head-andheart, which alone can apprehend the Invisible,
Imperishable, One. The faculty that comes to experience
this divine infinitude is often termed as "intuition," and in
the language of the Hindu Shastras, it is called the "Eye-ofWisdom."
They who realise and perceive the nature and the essential
distinction between the "Field," the "Knower-of-the-Field"
and the "Supreme," and thus come to experience the nonexistence of the "Field" (Prakriti or Avidya or Avyakta), and,
therefore, the "Knower-of-the-Field" (the individuality, the
ego, the samsarin, the limited), theirs is the Knowledge
Absolute. The "Field" is the material-cause, which has no
existence
apart
from
mere
imaginations
and
hallucinations. Non-apprehension of Reality gives rise to
mis-apprehensions of It. To realise the non-existence of the
very material-cause is to live the Infinite Nature of the
Supreme Self in ourselves, as ourselves.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
986

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the thirteenth
discourse ends entitled: THE FIELD AND THE KNOWEROF-THE-FIELD
This is one of the most brilliant chapters in the Geeta
which gives us a direct subjective method of meditating
upon and realising the Imperishable and the Eternal in
ourselves. To wake up from our dream is to end all the
sorrow that we might have suffered in the dream-state-ofConsciousness. There is no traffic between the frontiers
that clearly mark out the worlds of waking, dreaming and
the deep-sleep. In the same way, the Knower-of-the-Field
suffers the sorrows and the imperfections of the "Field"
but when through analysis the "Knower-of-the-Field"
understands its own real nature apart from the "Field," it
rediscovers its own Divine Nature and, in this awakening,
the dream that it was as the Knower-of-the-Field, ends.
The plurality and the sorrows are all the tearful details in
the dream-plot. To rediscover Pure Awareness and to
realise that it is the Self, which, dressed up in the "Field,"
becomes the agitated "Knower-of-the-Field" --- is to know
all that is to be known. In the entire Geeta, we fail to come
across a clearer and more direct indication of Reality.
Om Om Om Om Om

987

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 14
Gunatraya Vibhaga Yoga
The Yoga of Gunas
The Blessed Lord said: 1. I will again declare (to you) that
Supreme Knowledge, the best of all knowledges, having known
which, all the sages have attained Supreme Perfection after this
life.
Even a very intelligent man will need repeated
consolation when he is extremely agitated by any dire
emotion. He who identifies himself with his outward
personality and behaves as a finite mortal, cannot, in his
life of agitations and sorrows, easily comprehend and
appreciate that in his essential nature, he is the Infinite,
the Divine. Spiritual truths are to be constantly repeated,
again and again, by the teacher, until the student's
rebellious intellect apprehends them sufficiently. A
mother feeding a little baby in an Indian home is a typical
example; the mother will have to coax the child repeatedly
until sufficient food goes into its stomach. Similarly,
spiritual ideas will have to be repeated many times by the
teachers until they develop into strong inward personal
convictions in the student.
Therefore, the chapter opens with a declaration by the
Lord, "AGAIN WILL I TELL THEE." Not that the Supreme
988

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

theme has not yet been declared, but, for the purposes of
elucidation and correct appreciation, repetition is
unavoidable.
The theme of this chapter declared here is, "THAT
SUPREME KNOWLEDGE WHICH IS BETTER THAN
ALL OTHER KNOWLEDGES." This should not be taken
too literally. The subject-matter of the chapter deals with
the behaviour of man and the different influences that
play on his subtle body in life. This cannot be the Supreme
theme in philosophy. But it is declared here as the "highest
Knowledge,"
inasmuch
as,
without
a
correct
understanding of this theme, and without self-detection
and timely self-correction of the mental mechanism, it will
be impossible for a seeker to walk safely the path divine.
HAVING KNOWN WHICH, ALL THE MUNIS HAVE
ATTAINED TO THE HIGHEST PERFECTION --- A
precise knowledge of the gunas, it is claimed here, will
make the pilgrimage easier for all seekers. A true and
exhaustive knowledge of the 'path,' the possible dangers
en-route, the difficulties that might arise --- these should
pre-warn a pilgrim and he can undertake his journey well
equipped to meet all these possible dangers. An
understanding of the possible mischiefs of the mind is a
healthy warning to a diligent student of spirituality, so
that he can easily avoid the usual dangers, and meet his
subjective problems efficiently whenever they arise in
him.
989

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Muni does not mean an old man with a beard, living in a
jungle, eating roots and berries, but it means, "A man of
reflection and contemplation" (Manana Sheelavan). Thus,
an understanding of the gunas, their nature and their
tyranny, when and how they rise up in revolt against our
peaceful progress, are all preliminary information useful
for all Men-of-Reflection, who constantly digest and
assimilate their experiences in life and thereby gain
"wisdom."
AFTER THIS LIFE --- The attainment of Perfection is
promised here, as in many Upanishads, "AFTER THIS
LIFE." Some thinkers take this declaration too literally and
say that Perfection cannot be gained in this life while
living here. Very efficiently and logically, Shri
Shankaracharya and others break up this argument and
assert, again and again, that Perfection can be gained, here
and now, by any diligent seeker. According to these
Acharyas "AFTER THIS LIFE" means "at the end of our
ego-centric misconceptions of life."
Even in our life, we find that the bachelor must die to
become the married man; the virgin must die before she
becomes a mother. In the above cases, the person is not
dead but bachelor-hood and virginity have ended, so that
they may acquire husband-hood and mother-hood. Thus,
the individuals remaining the same, their status changes.
Through right reflection and true understanding, our false
values-of-life can end, and in the newly found "wisdom," a
life of better illumination and greater equanimity can be
990

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

lived. This hatching of the 'perfect,' out of its shell-like
imperfections around, is achieved in the inward warmth
of constant contemplation. The mind of an individual who
lives diligently with intellectual dynamism, may come
under the destructive influences of any of these gunas, and
thereby lose its serene equilibrium in contemplation.
Avoid it and cent-percent success is assured. Thus a
knowledge of the three gunas and their behaviour helps
indirectly every enthusiastic seeker.
THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO DECLARE THAT THIS
"KNOWLEDGE" DEFINITELY LEADS TO SUPREME
PERFECTION:
2. They who, having refuge in this "Knowledge, " have attained
to My Being, are neither born at the time of Creation, nor are
they disturbed at the time of dissolution.
The greatness of the "knowledge" contained in the chapter
is not so much in its philosophical implications as in the
benefit which is available to a seeker who diligently
makes use of it. He who has realised correctly the deep
significances in this chapter, can reach the State-ofPerfection; he shall "ATTAIN TO MY BEING" says the
Lord.
Whenever Krishna uses the first person singular 'I' in the
Geeta he indicated the State of Spiritual Perfection. The
theme of the chapter, as we have already indicated, is a
991

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

thorough study of the play of the gunas that bind us down
to the lower plane of matter identifications, and therefore,
to the ego-sense. When once we get away from the gunas
and totally stop their play in our mental life, we get
redeemed from our limited sense of individuality, and
instantaneously, we shall experience our Absolute
Universal Nature.
The sorrows of the dream --- though very true to the
dreamer while he dreams --- cannot affect him the
moment he wakes up. The joys and sorrows belonging to
one plane-of-Consciousness cannot stretch their arms to
throttle us in another plane-of-Consciousness. A seeker
who has, through meditation, mastered his mind and has
transcended it, and therefore, has reached beyond the
ordinary realms of Consciousness, cannot thereafter have
any sense of finitude and the consequent material
sorrows, as in his earlier days of Matter identifications. He
rediscovers himself to be the Omnipresent Reality, which
knows neither Creation nor dissolution, in Its Absolute
State.
This is indicated here: NEITHER ARE THEY BORN AT
THE TIME OF CREATION --- Creation is a trick of the
mind and when we are no more expressing through the
mind, and therefore, no longer conditioned by it, we
cannot have the experience of any "Creation." When anger
conquers my mind, I experience and behave as an angry
man; but when anger has receded and my mind is calmed,
I can no longer continue to behave as a bad-tempered
992

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

man. The tricks of the mind consist in projecting a worldof-Creation, thought by thought, and in feeling oneself
irredeemably conditioned by one's own imaginations. As
long as one is drowned in the mind, the storms of the
bosom must necessarily toss one about. On transcending
the mind, we realise the Self and its Infinite Nature, and
therefore, there is no Creation; nor shall we feel ourselves
as having been born.
NOR ARE THEY DISTURBED AT THE TIME OF
DISSOLUTION --- The sorrows of destruction are the
pangs of death. While dreaming one can go through the
sorrows of a dream-death, and yet, if at that time one
wakes up, one will at that very moment, laugh at one's
sorrows at the delusory death-pangs suffered in the
dream. Having realised the Absolute Nature, thereafter in
that State of Infinite Existence, one can no longer
experience either the sorrows of death or the troubles of
finitude.
But in order to conquer the mind, a seeker must know
very clearly the tricks by which the mind generally
hoodwinks him. A knowledge of the strategy of our
enemies is an essential prerequisite to plan out our attacks
successfully.
The stanza is, therefore, right when it declares that a
thorough knowledge of the gunas will be helpful to
everyone trying to master his own mind and reach the
993

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

freedom from all its moral agitations and ethical
imperfections.
THE FOLLOWING TWO STANZAS EXPLAIN HOW
THE UNIVERSE IS EVOLVED BY THE UNION
BETWEEN SPIRIT AND MATTER --- Spirit enveloped in
Matter is the pluralistic expression of Existence in the
world. From the inert stone to the greatest Prophet-ofWisdom, every existence is but the Spirit expressing
through Matter-vestures. In an earlier chapter, we have
already seen very clearly how the "Knower-of-the-Field"
working in the "Field" and identifying himself with it,
becomes the individualised "Ego," extremely sensitive to
the sorrows and tragedies, joys, and successes
of its environments.
THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO EXPLAIN, IN WHAT
WAY THE MARRIAGE BETWEEN THE "KNOWER-OFTHE-FIELD" AND THE "FIELD" TAKES PLACE, AND
HOW THE UNION COMES TO BREED OUR ENDLESS
SORROWS:
3. My womb is the great BRAHMAN (MULA PRAKRITI) ;
in that I place the germ; from which, O Bharata, is the birth of
all beings.
MY WOMB IS THE GREAT BRAHMAN (MULA
PRAKRITI) --- Krishna, the Pure Consciousness, is trying
994

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

to explain the "One-Womb" from which the entire
Universe has arisen. On many occasions, in our
discourses, we had stopped to explain how the OneConsciousness, identifying with various layers of Matter,
manifests Itself as different entities, with different
potentialities. A Prime Minister is also a voter --- just a
single voter under the constitution of the country. But a
Prime Minister's powers are a million times more than any
average voter can ever hope to have. This omnipotency is
gained by his OFFICE, because the voter in him has been
successful in identifying himself with the "heart" of the
majority of voters.
The Supreme, identifying Itself with the subtle Vasanas in
an individual, becomes an individualised "Ego." If any one
of us (as a single voter) can renounce his limited
tendencies and identify himself with the total thought-life
of the Universe (the total aspirations of the Janata), the
Consciousness that identified Itself with 'total mind' (the
individual who identifies himself with the majority of
voters) becomes the Ishwara (Prime Minister).
In the stanza, in the language of Vedanta, it is said that the
total-Vasanas of the world, meaning the "total-causalbody," is the "Womb," which gets impregnated by the
Lord. When life functions as the "total-causal-body," it
becomes dynamic and expresses itself as the "total-mindintellect" (Hiranya-garbha).

995

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It has already been explained that the Light of
Consciousness conditioned by the mind and intellectreflected in the mental pool of thought --- is the sense-ofego, the individuality, manifest in each of us. The total
potential factor, from which the world-of-matter emerges,
is termed as Nature --- Prakriti. The Prakriti then is called
the 'Great Cause,' because it embraces the entire Universe
which is but its effect. Again, from Nature, the entire
Universe has arisen and the Universe of names and forms
is nourished and fattened by the very source which has
given birth to it. Therefore, the total nature is termed here,
as elsewhere in Vedanta, as the Great (Mahat)-Brahma, the
total-mind-intellect-equipments.
IN THAT, I PLACE THE GERM --- This total potential
Nature is the virgin "Womb," in which, when the shaft of
Consciousness penetrates, the Light of Awareness that
consequently plays in it, is Its act of impregnation.
Thus vitalised by Life, the inert Prakriti becomes
dynamised, grows and manifests itself as the spectacular
Universe. Hence it is said, "FROM WHICH IS THE BIRTH
OF ALL BEINGS."
Every creative action owes its origin and progress to a
tendency for it in the artist. When this tendency in him
becomes vibrant with a part of the life in him, it becomes
potential, struggles to express itself in terms of ideas and
feelings, and later on gets expressed in the particular
medium of art chosen by the artist. He may express it
996

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

through colours, as in painting; through songs, as in
music; through stones, as in sculpture; or through words,
as in literature. But a dead artist can no more express
anything --- even in terms of artistic ideas or thoughts. The
total Universe of ideas and tendencies (Vasanas), when
graced by Life, becomes vigorous and expresses as the
Universe created.
The world of Vasanas, of ideas, of thoughts, and of actions,
together constituting the total Nature, is ever controlled
and directed by the gunas, and therefore, the three gunas
are together called in Vedanta as Maya, the "cause of the
Universe." Maya, expressed in the individual bosom, is
called 'ignorance'(avidya). The 'ignorance'is, therefore, the
microcosmic expression of Maya, and the total
"ignorance," in its macrocosmic expression, is Maya. An
individualised EGO is under the control of avidya, while
Maya is under the control of Ishwara.
We are only to remember that we have been told already
in the previous chapter, viz., that the "Field" and the
"Knower-of-the-Field" are the two aspects of Nature
(Prakriti), and both of them function on the same
Substratum, the Absolute Eternal Truth, the Lord Krishna
Himself. The Supreme, functioning in the "Field," becomes
the Enjoyerof-the-Field, and therefore, the "Knower-of-the-Field,"
detaching from the "Field," rediscovers himself to be the
Pure Absolute Consciousness.
997

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

CONTINUING TO ELABORATE THIS SUBTLE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MATTER AND SPIRIT,
AND EXPLAINING HOW THE ABSOLUTE IS THE
UNCONTAMINATED
AND
EVER-VITALISING
PRINCPLE IN BOTH THE "FIELD" AND IN THE
"KNOWER-OF-THE-FIELD":
4. Whatever forms are produced, O Kaunteya, in all the wombs
whatsoever, the great BRAHMA is their womb, and I the seedgiving Father.
IN ALL WOMBS --- In the living world, infinite varieties
of beings are born and continue to live, and they are
replaced at every moment by millions of new births. If the
whole Universe is looked at in one gaze, we find therein,
seething activities of new births. Everywhere, the birth of
an organism is nothing but an expression of Spirit through
a given matter-envelopment. Thus viewed, every Matter
particle is the "womb," which, when dynamised by the
"Light of Consciousness," becomes a potential living
being. Every expression of life is Matter containing within
its bosom a tiny spark of the Spirit.
Lord Krishna, as the Supreme Consciousness, Absolute
and Infinite, declares here figuratively: "I AM THE
FATHER OF THE UNIVERSE," who places the sperm-oflife in the womb-of-Nature (Prakriti). A "Field," in itself,
has no existence without the "Knower-of-the-Field"
vitalising it. A steam engine, minus steam, is only so much
998

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

iron in that particular shape! But when steam passes
through it, the engine expresses its motive force and
strength, and its particular ability, locomotion. Similarly,
the body-mind-intellect are only so much minerals unless
Consciousness expresses Itself, through it. No doubt, a
bachelor, in himself, can have no child to claim as his own,
however potent he may be. He has to get married and his
seed is to be placed in the womb. The Spirit cannot
express Itself without the Matter. These ideas are
summarised in this stanza when Lord Krishna says that
He is the Eternal Father, who impregnates the entire
world-of-Matter and arranges the play of life on the stage
of the world.
The Geeta happened to be declared and written long
before Christ, and therefore, the Bible cannot claim, as
some of us have been coaxed to believe, that the great
Fatherhood of God is a fact recognised ONLY by the
Christian faith. At best, we can say that it is an idea
borrowed from earlier religions. The Hindus did not overemphasise this Father-hood of God, because, even though
the idea is quite poetic, philosophically, if cannot hold
much water. But as later religions found such ideas more
easily digestible for the not-so-intelligent masses, they
seem to have borrowed them liberally.
TAKING UP THE MAIN THEME OF THE CHAPTER,
LORD KRISHNA EXPLAINS WHAT THE "GUNAS" ARE,
AND HOW THEY BIND THE SPIRIT WITHIN MATTER
TO CREATE THE INDIVIDUALISED EGO-SENSE IN US:
999

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

5. Purity, passion, and inertia --- these qualities (GUNAS) , O!
mighty-armed, born of "PRAKRITI" bind, the Indestructible,
Embodied one, fast in the body.
GUNAS BORN OF PRAKRITI --- It is indeed difficult to
find an adequate rendering for the word "guna" in English.
The tradition of thought in the West has nothing
equivalent to these terms, as the science of psychology in
the West is even today passing through its very early
childhood. The influences (gunas) under which the
thoughts function in each bosom, will be considered by it
only when analytical and experimental psychology has
exhausted its observations and study.
The concept of Sattwa is rather that of perfect purity and
luminosity, the opposite of "foul-darkness" called Tamas,
and distinctly different from the "dusky-colour" of Rajas.
We find in our literature that these gunas are associated
with-light (Sattwa), red-colour (Rajas) and darkness
(Tamas).
The term guna also means 'rope,' by which, the spiritual
beauty of life in us is tied down to the inert and insentient
Matter-vestures. In short, gunas are the three different
influences under which every human mind has to play in
such an endless variety at different moments of its
changing environments.

1000

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

These gunas are born of Matter. Produced by Nature, the
"Field," they generate a feeling of attachment, and
successfully delude the indwelling Self and chain It AS IT
WERE, to the cycle of birth-and-death, in a stream of
constant change and pain. The gunas have no separate
existence as attributes inherent in a substance. All that we
can say is that they are as many different mental climates
in which the minds behave so differently from each other,
according to their given moods, governed by the
predominating gunas at any particular moment of
observation.
These gunas, like chords, AS IT WERE, bind the Spirit to
Matter and create, in the Infinite Spirit, the painful sense
of limitations and sorrows. The Infinite and All-pervading
Spirit can never be contaminated by the dreamy
projections of a delusory world-of-Matter. The ghost that
emerges from a post cannot leave its marks on the post.
Even after murdering a dozen people in my dream, my
hands, that were dripping with blood, cannot, when I
wake up, carry any blood stains. While dreaming, no
doubt, the "dream world" of my own imaginations was
real to the dreamer in me. But, on waking, the waker in
me cannot have any marks left over on him from the
dream. Similarly, the Eternal Life, functioning in Matter,
gets, AS IT WERE, bound to the limitations and finitude of
Matter, and this delusory experience is continued as long
as the gunas bind It to and entangle It in Matter.

1001

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Now it becomes evident how a clear understanding of
what constitutes the gunas and how they bind us to Matter
will provide us surely with a charter of freedom, a scheme
for getting ourselves freed from the tentacles of our own
imaginations.
The embodied-self, though Indestructible and Infinite, in
Its identifications and attachments with the body, feels the
changes in the body as Its own changes. This delusion is
maintained, in each one of us, by the play of the three
gunas in us. In the following stanzas, we have a clear
enumeration of the behaviour of the mind when it comes
under the influence of each of these gunas separately.
OF THESE THREE GUNAS, "SATTWA" IS THUS
DEFINED:
6. Of these, "SATTWA" which because of its stainlessness, is
luminous and healthy, (unobstructive) . It binds by (creating)
attachment to 'happiness' and attachment to 'knowledge, ' O
sinless one.
Nothing can be defined as such --- this is an accepted fact
in all sciences. No disease can be defined by itself; nor can
any emotion be described as such --- without explaining
its symptoms and expressions. So too, no gunas can be
defined directly. In the following stanzas we find
descriptions of a mind under the influence of each of these
gunas, by enumerating the type of emotions that are
1002

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

aroused in it, and its peculiar and distinct behaviours.
This symptomatic description is, no doubt, more helpful
to us, the seekers, because each of us can observe and
analyse the types of emotions and thoughts arising in our
mind-intellect equipments and determine what type of
guna is governing us at any given time.
BECAUSE OF ITS STAINLESSNESS, SATTWA IS
LUMINOUS --- When Sattwa comes to dominate as the
most important influence in our thought-life, because of
its purity, it is ever luminous --- it has neither the dullcolour of Rajas, nor the dark impurities of Tamas. Under
the Sattwa-influence, the mind is steady, reflecting ever
faithfully, the Consciousness, the Self.
FREE FROM EVIL i. e. HEALTHY --- Evil tendencies must
rise in the mind long before the action expressing the
same is committed in the world outside; as the thought, so
the actions. Thus the evil starts germinating in the mental
life. We call that an evil whereby we try to satisfy the
appetites of the flesh, the selfish agitations of the mind
and the ego-centric desires of our head. Ego-centric selfgratification is the womb from which all evils are born.
Such low impulses and confusions can arise only when
the mind is under the influence of Rajas and Tamas.
Therefore, what is meant here is, Sattwa is free from all
evils, as it is relatively free from Rajasic agitations or
Tamasic darkness. Though Sattwa is thus the most divine
mental attitude, still it binds us and acts as a limitation on
our divine nature.
1003

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SATTWA BINDS BY ATTACHMENT TO 'HAPPINESS'
AND 'KNOWLEDGE' --- When the mind is purified from
all its agitations (Rajas) and the intellect is cleansed of its
agitations (Rajas) and the intellect is cleansed of its low
passions and criminal lusts (Tamas), no doubt, the
personality becomes purified, experiencing a greater share
of inward peace and happiness and enjoys a greater share
of subtle understanding and intellectual comprehension.
But even these can create a bondage on the freedom of the
Absolute Self. A gold-chain, if sufficiently strong can also
bind as any iron-chain. "Goodness," though it gives us
freedom from all vulgarities, can also shackle us within its
own limitation! A perfect one, absolutely free, is bound
neither by goodness, nor by evil.
Consciousness, the All-pervading Principle of Awareness,
expressed as the Self, in each one of us, does not directly
comprehend any object or idea in the world outside. What
we generally understand as intelligence is the Eternal
Light of Consciousness, reflected in our mind-intellectequipment. Naturally therefore, the capacity to perceive
the world intelligently, differs from person to person
because in no two of us the inner equipments can be the
same.
The reflection in a reflecting medium, will depend entirely
upon the cleanliness and steadiness of the medium. If the
mind is clean and the intellect steady, a more efficient
intelligence is manifest. Thus, whenever a given mind is in
an inspiring and creative mood, it is actually intelligent
1004

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and it is capable of taking longest flights into the realms of
wisdom. On all such occasions of vast knowing and deep
understanding, the inner equipment is under the influence
of Sattwa, wherein the agitations, created by Rajas, and the
murkiness, created by Tamas, do not express themselves.
Sattwa also binds the Infinite to Matter through the
attachment to 'knowledge' and 'happiness'. When once
one has experienced the thrilling joys of creative thinking
and the inspiring life of goodness and wisdom one gets so
attached to them that one will thereafter sacrifice anything
around in order to live constantly that subtle joy. A true
scientist, working self-dedicatedly in his laboratory; a
painter working at his canvas in his shabby studio, pale
with hunger and weak with disease; a poet hunted out
from society, living in public parks, seeking his own joys
in his own visions and words; martyrs facing cruel
persecutions; politicians suffering long years of exile;
mountaineers embracing death --- are all examples of
how, having known the subtler thrills of a higher joy,
when the bosom is inspired with Sattwa, the individual
becomes as much bound with attachment to them as
others are to their own material joys and possessions.
NOW THE DIAGNOSIS OF 'RAJAS,' WHEN IT COMES
TO PLAY ITS HAVOC IN THE HUMAN BOSOM:

1005

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

7. Know thou "RAJAS" (to be) of the nature of passion, the
source of thirst and attachment; it binds fast, O Kaunteya, the
embodied one, by attachment to action.
A seeker, who is striving to conquer his own mind must
know all its subtle inclinations by which, again and again,
his thoughts run amuck only to return and increasingly
sabotage his inner personality.
KNOW "RAJAS" TO BE THE NATURE OF PASSION --Where there is an onslaught of Rajoguna--Influences in the
bosom, man's mind is wrecked with a hundred painful
passions. Passions are the main symptoms of the working
of Rajoguna in the psychological field. Passion expresses
itself in a million different urges, desires, emotions, and
feelings. Yet, all of them can fall only under two distinct
categories: desires and attachments. Thus, in the Geeta,
Lord Krishna mentions these two as the very sources from
which all passions arise.
GIVES RISE TO THIRST AND ATTACHMENT --- The
term used in Sanskrit for 'desire' is 'thirst'. When an
individual is thirsty, nothing, for the time being, is of as
much importance as water, which alone can satisfy his
thirst. Just as a thirsty man would struggle and suffer,
wanting nothing but water to relieve his pangs, so too, a
human personality thirsts for the satisfaction of every
desire that burns him down. Once the desire is fulfilled, a
sense of attachment comes like a vicious passion to
smother down all the peace and joy of the mind. DESIRE
1006

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

is our mental relationship towards 'objects' which have
not yet been acquired by us and ATTACHMENT is the
mental slavishness binding us to the objects so acquired.
These two --- DESIRE for the acquisition of things and the
creation of situations which are expected to yield a certain
quota of personal happiness, and the sense of clinging
ATTACHMENT to things already so acquired --- are the
volcanoes that constantly throw up their molten lava to
scorch and raze the smiling fields of life. The burning lava,
that is emitted by these fiery mountains, comprising the
various passions that man expresses in his sensual life,
make up the strifes and struggles to acquire, to possess
and to guard what is already gained.
IT BINDS FAST THE EMBODIED ONE BY
ATTACHMENT TO ACTION --- When once an individual
has come under the influence of Rajas, he expresses
innumerable desires, and bound in his own attachments,
he lives on in the world manifesting a variety of passions.
Such a passionate being-goaded by his desires for things
not yet acquired, and crushed under the weight and
responsibility of his attachments to things that he
possesses --- can never keep quiet but must necessarily act
on endlessly earning and spending, and yet thirsting for
more and more. Anxious to have more, fearing to lose, he
becomes entangled in the joys of his successes, involved in
the pangs of his failures, and lives as an "embodied-one,"
chained by his own actions.
1007

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Actions are born of passions. Passions arise from desires
and attachments. And all these are the symptoms of the
presence of the Rajoguna-influences upon our mind. Thus,
if Sattwa-guna binds us with its own anxieties for
happiness and peace, wisdom and knowledge, as has been
said in the previous stanza, Rajo-guna also seemingly
binds the Infinite Self to Matter-vestures and makes It
play the part of a limited being through an endless array
of inexhaustible actions. Though the Self is not an agent
(ACTOR), Rajas makes It act with the idea "I AM THE
DOER."
TAMAS ALSO HELPS TO BIND THE DIVINE TO THE
MORTAL FLESH. HOW?
8. But, know thou TAMAS is born of ignorance, deluding all
embodied beings, it binds fast, O Bharata, by heedless-ness,
indolence and sleep.
TAMAS IS BORN OF 'IGNORANCE' --- Under the
influence of Tamas man's intellectual capacity to
discriminate between the right and wrong gets veiled and
he starts acting as if under some hallucination or
stupefaction. Lord Krishna says that Tamas, in the human
personality, binds it to its lower nature by providing it
with endless misconceptions and miscomprehensions of
the true divine purpose of life, which, naturally, forces one
in that condition to live in indolence, heedless of the
higher purposes. One thereafter lives ever asleep to the
1008

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

nobler and the diviner aspirations of life. There is no
consistency of purpose, brilliance of thought, tenderness
of emotion, or nobility of action in an individual who
comes under the contamination of the Tamogunainfluences.
So far, the Lord has been systematically mentioning the
symptoms which are observed in our mental life when
these gunas pollute our inner tranquillity. These three
gunas not only bring about different amounts of divine
brilliance in a given individual but also limit the Eternal
Self, in all Its perfection, to feel and act as THOUGH It is
limited and conditioned by the matter-envelopments.
AGAIN, THE ACTIONS OF THE 'GUNAS' IN OUR
INNER WORLD ARE BRIEFLY INDICATED:
9. SATTWA attaches to happiness, RAJAS to action, O
Bharata, while TAMAS, verily, shrouding knowledge, attaches
to heedlessness.
These are the ideas that have already been described in
the three stanzas; but, the Geeta is given out as a
conversation between two individuals; a Divine Man-ofWisdom, anxious to help the other, who is an ordinary
man of average intelligence.
SATTWA ATTACHES ITSELF TO HAPPINESS --- An
individual, who has experienced the thrills of the creative
1009

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

moments in life --- a scientist, an artist, a poet, or for that
matter any independent thinker --- will not ever like to
come down to the passionate world of Rajas, or into the
dark sorrows of Tamas. Sattwa makes us attached to the
inward happiness, arising from life fully lived.
RAJAS TO ACTION --- If, on the other hand, one is under
the influence of Rajas, it makes one naturally passionate
with hundreds of thirsty 'desires' and deep 'attachments,'
and in the course of their fulfilment, one is made to sweat
and toil in the fields of endless activities.
TAMAS, SHROUDING KNOWLEDGE ATTACHES ONE
TO HEEDLESS-NESS --- When Tamas comes to play, by its
very nature, it veils right judgement, and in the resultant
indiscriminations,
we
get
attached
to
wrong
comprehensions. We become heedless to the calls of the
Higher in us.
WHEN DO THE 'GUNAS' PRODUCE THE EFFECTS
DESCRIBED ABOVE?
10. Now SATTWA rises (prevails) , O Bharata, having overpowered RAJAS and inertia (TAMAS) ; now RAJAS, having
over-powered SATTWA and inertia; and inertia (TAMAS) ,
having over-powered SATTWA and RAJAS.
At this level of our discussion, any intelligent student
should wonder whether these gunas produce their effects,
1010

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

or act, at different times, each by turn. If they act, all at one
time, do they act in perfect concord, or in mutual discord?
Naturally, the Lord, in His Divine Song, anticipates this
doubt, and answers it in this stanza. He explains how
these gunas act at different times --- each one of them
becoming prominent and powerful for the time being.
SATTWA RISES --- The stanza clearly shows that at any
given moment, a human personality, if analysed, can be
found to work under the influence of one predominating
guna, wherein the other two gunas are not totally absent,
but are only of secondary importance. When we say that
one is under the influence of Sattwa, it means that Rajas
and Tamas in him are, at that given moment, not quite
prominent to contribute enough of their particular nature.
Thus, when Sattwa predominates over Rajas and Tamas, it
produces, in that bosom, at that time, its own nature of
happiness and knowledge.
When Rajas predominates over Sattwa and Tamas, it
expresses its own nature of passions and desires,
attachments and actions.
When Tamas predominates over Sattwa and Rajas, it
produces its own effects of shrouding knowledge and
making the personality heedless of its nobler duties.

1011

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

BUT HOW ARE WE TO KNOW WHEN A PARTICULAR
'GUNA'IS PREDOMINATING OVER THE OTHER
'GUNAS'?
11. When, through every gate (sense) in this body, the light-ofintelligence shines, then it may be known that 'SATTWA' is
predominant.
Here follows a discussion of three stanzas, each giving us
a more subjective insight into the symptoms produced by
the guna concerned, from which we can understand,
under the influence of which guna the personality is
working at any given moment.
WHEN THROUGH EVERY GATE (SENSE) IN THIS
BODY, THE LIGHT-OF-INTELLIGENCE SHINES --- The
apertures of the physical structure, through which the
perceived world-of-objects enters us, are the windows-ofknowledge, the "sense organs." Through these holes, the
Light-of-Awareness, goes out, AS IT WERE, to illumine
the various objects of the world. The Knowledge in me
pouring out through the eyes, becomes the power of
vision and illumines for me all the forms and colours of
the world. The same Eternal Awareness, through the ears,
which cannot illumine form, brings within my
comprehension the world-of-sound around me. So too, the
Divine Light of Cognition beaming out through the
tongue illumines the taste.
1012

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus, "seven tongues of flame" shoot out from the same
Fire-of-Knowledge, the Self, in us. Each beam of light, as it
emerges from each window in the body, illumines one
aspect of the world outside. It must be the experience of
all that, while we are perceiving something, and efficiently
illumining it, we are really in a state of Sattwa, at this
moment. If there be at the time Rajas and Tamas in us, our
perception is hampered.
If the mind is agitated by Rajas and the intellect is veiled
by Tamas, even ordinary, efficient perceptions become
almost impossible. Thus, the more often and more
completely we go beyond Rajas and Tamas, and thereby
make our bosom full of Sattwa, the more grows our
capacity to observe, to analyse, to understand and to
become aware of the world outside and judge it correctly.
It has already been explained that the mechanism of
knowing the world outside is the intellect; and, the
Consciousness, reflected in the intellect, is the light-ofintelligence by which we illumine the world of ideas,
feelings and objects available in our life. The sunlight
outside never comes directly to a room to illumine the
things in the room. It is always the light of the Sun
reflected on the walls that illumines a cosy room. Similarly
the Light of Consciousness, reflected in the intellect, is the
beam of light that illumines the world-of-objects. The
gunas are the influences under which the mind and
intellect live.
1013

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is very well known that a clean and steady reflecting
medium will reflect more efficiently than an unsteady,
unclean surface. Rajas creates agitations and makes the
intellect unsteady; Tamas created veilings and makes the
intellect unclean. Naturally, the greater the proportion of
Rajas and Tamas in a bosom, the lesser will be its quota of
intelligence. Therefore, it is highly scientific to say that, "at
the moment of knowing and comprehending the world,"
one's bosom is surely in its pure Sattwik-MOOD.
THE CHARACTERISTIC MARKS THAT INDICATE THE
PRE-DOMINANCE OF "RAJAS" ARE DESCRIBED IN
THE FOLLOWING:
12. Greed, activity, undertaking of actions, restless-ness longing
--- these arise when RAJAS is predominant, O best in the
Bharata family.
GREED, ACTIVITY, ENTERPRISE, (UNDERTAKING-OFACTIONS) UNREST (RESTLESS-NESS), LONGING --Enumerating the type of thoughts and motives that rise
up in a mind in which Rajas predominates, Lord Krishna
lists the following as the most important. GREED is the
inexhaustible desire to appropriate the property of
another, an appetite which has the tendency of growing
more in volume as we satisfy it. By "ACTIVITY" is meant
here, officially engaging oneself in matters which are not
one's own. The term ENTERPRISE is here used to indicate
all activities motivated by extreme egoism, undertaken
1014

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

with the intention to fulfil and satisfy the ego-centric, and
therefore, the selfish desires. RESTLESSNESS is another
type of experience that is lived through by a Rajasic
personality. Because of restlessness, the individual fails to
enjoy quietude. The term UNREST is oscillation of the
mind which is defined as by Shri Shankaracharya "Giving
vent to joy, attachment, etc."
To a large extent these three are inter-connected, and each
successive one can be seen to have risen from the previous
tendency. Greed must make the greedy very active
indeed, and, when an activity motivated by greed is
undertaken, it expresses in selfish enterprises, and once a
man enters such a field of selfish activities --- in his
anxiety for the results, in his mental agitations --- he
creates a set of unhealthy circumstances around him and
gets dragged towards their centre, where he is led to
perpetrate more and more bitter cruelties, base
immoralities and bloody crimes; and his inward quietude
gets completely shattered. He experiences extreme unrest.
Naturally, one who is in this condition of mind, sweating
and labouring in the outer fields, with a heart poisoned by
Rajas, must come under the sway of endless longings --for things not-yet-accomplished, for objects not-yetacquired, for profits not-yet-gained.
In short, under the contagion of Rajas, the psychological
being in us gets extremely persecuted by its own
restlessness which gets expressed in its endless plans,
exhausting actions, agonising desires, painful longings,
1015

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

maddening greed and oppressive restlessness. When such
an individual works in society, his sorrows do not rest
with himself --- they spread, like contagion, to many
thousands around him.
SIMILARLY, WHEN 'TAMAS' PRE-DOMINATES, WHAT
EXACTLY ARE THE SYMPTOMS? LISTEN:
13. Darkness, inertness, heedlessness and delusion --- these arise
when 'TAMAS' is predominant, O descendant-of-Kuru.
DULLNESS,
INERTNESS,
HEEDLESSNESS
AND
DELUSION --- When these symptoms are recognised by
an individual in himself, according to the Geeta, the
seeker can take it that he is suffering from Tamas. Dullness
(Aprakashah) is that condition of the intellect where it is
incapable of arriving at any decision, a state when a sort of
drowsiness veils the potentialities of one's intelligence and
makes it impossible for one to discriminate between the
right and the wrong. This condition is experienced
everyday by every one of us, as sleep conquers our nature
at night.
INACTION (Apravritti), IDLENESS --- The tendency to
escape all responsibilities, the sense of incapacity to
undertake any endeavour and the lack of enthusiasm to
strive for and achieve anything in the world --- is the state
of inaction explained herein. When Tamas predominates,
all ambitions are sapped. Energy is dormant; capacity is
1016

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

gone, and thereafter, eating and sleeping alone become the
individual's main occupations in life.
The natural effect on the personality of a man who is
living such a life is that, as an individual, he becomes
heedless of the higher calls within himself. Nor can one
be, in fact, a Ravana-like destructive criminal. Even to be
bad, it needs a good amount of enthusiasm and an endless
spirit of activity.
He not only becomes incapable of responding to the good
or the bad in him, but also slowly sinks into delusions. He
miscalculates the world around him, misinterprets his
own possibilities, and always makes mistakes in
determining his relationship with the world around.
When thus an individual fails to understand rightly
himself, the world outside, and his own right relationship
with the world around him, the life becomes an error --his very existence, a sad mistake.
After thus indicating how the mind and intellect would
react under the three distinct influences of Sattwa, Rajas
and Tamas, the Gita Acharya wants us to understand that,
not only are these gunas effective while we live the present
embodiment, but the tendencies of the mind, cultivated
and developed, pursued and strengthened while living,
will determine the life and condition of the individual
even after death.

1017

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Life after death is a topic that does not seem to have been
fully thought out in any other school of philosophy except
in the exhaustive Science of Life, Hinduism. All other
creeds have their own different explanations but none of
them actually believes that there is no life after death. The
other creeds have only dogmatic declarations regarding
life after death, but they have no logical thought
development regarding this topic which can be
crystallised into a complete philosophy.
Earlier in the Geeta, we had exhaustively dealt with this
topic of re-incarnation. We had indicated that death is the
total divorce of the subtle-body from its physicalstructure. Therefore, death is the destiny of the body in me
and not a tragedy of my ever-existing personality. I, as my
subtle-body, move out of the present physical-structure,
when I have exhausted my purpose with the present
body. The subtle-body is constituted of my mind-andintellect which is nothing but a bundle of thoughts. Even
while I am living in this body, my thoughts determine my
movements, both physical and subtle. Therefore, the
Hindu philosophers are logical when they indicate that
after death, one would still be pursuing the resultant of
one's thoughts, which one had in life while acting through
the body.
When I am transferred from my present station of office to
another area, I can call at my bank and expect to get from
them not the total amount of money I had DEPOSITED in
the past, but only the "BALANCE" that stands to my
1018

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

credit. So too, the resultant of the positive and negative
thoughts entertained, actions done, motives and intentions
encouraged, should determine the type and texture of the
thoughts in us at the moment of our leaving the physicalstructure.
That the quality of our thoughts is influenced by the type
of guna that influences our inner make up is a truth that is
already known. Therefore, it is logical that the
predominant guna, cultivated by each one of us through
the life of activities and thoughts, should determine the
direction and the range of the disembodied, in its flight to
the beyond after its release from the body. These
possibilities are explained in this section of the Geeta.
WHATEVER LIFE IS OBTAINED AFTER DEATH IS
CAUSED BY THE QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF
DESIRES AND ATTACHMENTS, AND THE NATURE
AND NUMBER OF DESIRES AND ATTACHMENTS
ARE DETERMINED BY THE 'GUNAS'. THIS IS TAUGHT
HERE:
14. If the embodied one meets with death when SATTWA is
predominant, then he attains to the spotless worlds of the
"Knowers of the Highest. "
IF THE EMBODIED ONE MEETS WITH DEATH WHEN
'SATTWA' IS PREDOMINANT --- In the scheme of the
thought-development in Geeta, Krishna now gives us an
1019

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

idea as to the direction in which the mental-equipment of
a dead one will move after death. This can be, to a large
extent, scientifically determined by a close and intelligent
observation of his mental behaviour even during life. A
doctor cannot, all of a sudden one fine morning, start
thinking of and solving a subtle architectural problem nor
can an engineer overnight feel inspired to write out a
prescription for cancer. The doctor has trained his mind
for thinking on medicines and disease and the engineer
has trained himself to solve the problems of constructive
destruction! At any given moment, the mind of a doctor
will be thinking of medicines alone, in conformity with his
education and the type of thoughts his mind is trained to
entertain.
Thus, there is a continuity of thought-life in this
embodiment; this year's thoughts have a continuity with
our last year's thoughts; this month's thoughts are
determined by the last month's thoughts; this week's
thoughts are an extension of last week's thoughts; today's
thoughts are continued tomorrow. And every moment is
an extension of the previous moment's thoughts. If, thus,
there is a continuous development and growth observable
in the thought-life, in its unbroken continuity connecting
the past, the present, and the future into one unbroken
flow, then, there is no reason why, at the time of death,
this continuity should suddenly end. Death is only
another experience; it will certainly colour the thoughts
that follow it --- but then all experiences have been
colouring all our past thoughts, and our future thoughts
1020

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

are being coloured by our present experiences. Therefore,
the type of thoughts entertained during our life-time
should determine the type of thoughts we will entertain
soon after our departure from this physical structure.
If the embodied one leaves the present physical structure -- and therefore, his present environments and
relationship --- he should continue his thought-life. The
direction in which it will make its flight is determined by
the type of training it had acquired during its sojourn in
its embodied state here.
If Sattwa predominates, then, HE ATTAINS TO THE
SPOTLESS REGIONS OF THE "KNOWERS OF THE
HIGHEST" --- It is a concept in our Scriptures (Agamas)
that the highest realm of abundant joy, unaffected by any
excessive Rajas or Tamas, is the realm of the Creator,
Brahmaloka --- supremely happy and extremely creative.
WHILE IN 'RAJAS,' IF ONE DEPARTS:
15. Meeting death in RAJAS, he is born among those attached
to action; and dying in TAMAS, he is born in the womb of the
senseless.
MEETING DEATH IN RAJAS, HE IS BORN AMONG
THOSE ATTACHED TO ACTION --- If, at the time it
leaves the body, the mind is under the influence of Rajas,
it takes, according to its tendencies and desires, to fulfil
1021

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

them, an embodiment among those who are extremely
attached to action. It means that the mind will seek and
successfully discover a field where it can completely
exhaust its existing tendencies.
On the other hand, if one dies, when one's mind is
drowned in extreme 'Tamas,' one reaches the lower realms
of irrational beings such as the animal and the vegetable
kingdoms.
It is a consoling philosophy, no doubt, to believe that once
having come up the ladder of evolution to become man,
never shall we go into the lower strata of evolution. But it
is against the truth of what we observe around us. We
find, in fact, that even after having been given the best set
of circumstances and environments, the members of the
human community are not all equally ready to make use
of them and evolve in their cultural status. A rich man's
son, having average intelligence and a good start in life, is
not always ready to make use of those conducive
circumstances, but invariably, he lives a careless
unhealthy life and destroys himself later on.
Having been born as rational beings, how many of us
behave with discrimination? A few in society even look up
to the cattle and declare that they have a nobler life and a
happier existence! That is to say, to a minority of bipeds
the life of the quadrupeds is of higher evolution!! And,
when such an idea is entertained in the mind of an
individual, the life of the cattle is no devolution to him,
1022

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

but is only an acquisition of something which he is
thirsting for. To a teetotaller, a drinking booth is nothing
but a den of sorrow and death; but, to the drunkard the
same is his haven of joy and harbour of happiness.
To the Tamasic, to be born in the animal kingdom is a
wonderful chance to exhaust their appetites and to
express fully their nature. Thus, philosophically viewed,
we have to accept without any reservation that the
'Tamasic' must mentally find a complete fulfilment in
animal embodiment. So they are born there to fulfil their
own elected purpose.
HERE FOLLOWS A SUMMARY OF WHAT HAS BEEN
TAUGHT IN THE PRECEDING FEW VERSES:
16. The fruit of good action, they say, is SATTWIC and pure;
verily, the fruit of RAJAS is pain, and the fruit of TAMAS is
ignorance.
In this stanza, Krishna, the great conversationalist, is
summarizing again what he has already mentioned in the
previous stanzas. Herein, he is indicating in brief the
results gained when a psychological being lives the three
gunas severally.
THE FRUIT OF GOOD ACTIONS, THEY SAY, IS
'SATTWIC' AND PURE --- If we carefully analyse, we
shall find that thought is the father of all action. Thoughts
1023

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

are the seeds sown, and actions the harvest gathered.
Seeds of weeds cannot but produce weeds; bad thoughts
can manifest only as bad actions. And the negative actions
in the outside world, fatten the wrong tendencies of the
mind and thus multiply the inward agitations.
It is, therefore, true in the logic of our philosophy --- and
extremely true in the logic of our worldly experiences too -- that if one is to live a quiet, contented and cheerful life
of service and devotion, of love and kindness, of mercy
and compassion, and live thus a "good life," certainly such
a life indicated the Sattwic nature of one's mind. And such
an individual, living such a noble life, must necessarily
grow in his inward purity.
It may be asked how one can start becoming good when
one is already so bad at present. If actions are the
expressions of thoughts, and if the existing mental nature
is negative, how can we expect such an individual to bring
about a change in the climatic conditions within his
bosom? All religions, the world over, answer this question
in their injunction and insistence that seekers of truth,
devotees of the Lord, votaries of culture --- all must strive
to live ethically a pure, moral, and noble life.
No doubt, disciplining the mind and changing the quality
of thoughts are not easy jobs; but to change to type of
actions and to discipline our external movements is
relatively easy. Therefore, to practise goodness, to
discipline our behaviour, to act the good Samaritan, are all
1024

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the beginning of this great scheme of self-revival. When
noble action is undertaken soon it becomes a habit and
this external habit of discipline tends to discipline the
mind.
Hence, the insistence, in all cultures, that from childhood,
elders must be respected, authority should be obeyed, lies
must not be uttered, scriptures are to be read, education
must be undertaken, cleanliness must be practised etc.
When these are enforced upon the child, it, perhaps, takes
them all as varieties of tyranny under which it is
compelled to live. In the long run, however, these rules
bring about unconsciously a discipline in the minds of the
children.
A thrilling joy of mental serenity, a state of minimum
agitation, a capacity to direct this mental strength of such
a dynamic mind towards any single-pointed selfapplication --- these are all indicated as the fruits of good
actions, when the mind grows in Sattwa-guna and purity.
Passions and agitations are the impurities in the mind;
bad actions increase them; good actions, by their very
nature, quieten the mind and sap its passions.
THE FRUIT OF 'RAJAS' IS PAIN --- This phrase only
supports our commentary on the previous one. It has
already been said that Rajas is of the nature of passion,
giving rise to insatiable desires and extreme attachment,
and in our attempts to fulfil them, we get drowned in a
multiplicity of actions. (Stanzas 7, 12). Thus, one with a
1025

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mind under the influence of Rajas, entertains desires, and
in order to pacify the stormy conditions, one is forced to
act in the world outside striving to acquire, to possess, to
keep, to spend, to enjoy, to save, and to preserve what has
been saved. Slowly, the individual is dragged into an
entombing morass of suffocating death, in a stinking pit of
pain and agony. "VERILY THE FRUIT OF RAJAS IS
PAIN."
IGNORANCE IS THE FRUIT OF 'TAMAS' --- That
dullness in action, heedlessness and illusion are the
symptoms of Tamas in our subtle-body, has already been
indicated. Here it is said that Tamas veils our
discriminating capacity and foils our attempts at
understanding and rightly judging the world of things
and beings and the world of happenings around us.
Rajas breeds agitations in the mind. And Sattwa is that
condition within us when the mind has least thought
agitations and the intellect is clear and bright in its
rational and discriminative powers. In short, Sattwa is the
"condition of dynamic quietude" which is the creative
moment in man's inward nature.
AND WHAT ARISES FROM THE 'GUNAS'?
17. Knowledge arises from SATTWA, greed from RAJAS,
heedlessness, delusion and also ignorance arise from TAMAS.
1026

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The functions of the gunas, while they appear on the stage
of the mind-intellect, are explained here.
FROM SATTWA ARISES WISDOM --- It has already been
explained how Pure Consciousness, of Its own accord, has
nothing to illumine or understand. In the Pure,
Homogeneous Self, there is nothing other than Itself for It
to understand, It being the Undivided and Indivisible One
Eternal Truth. Consciousness reflected in the subtle-body
is the 'intelligence' by which we gain knowledge of the
world outside. The knower is the Spirit conditioned by the
mind-intellect. Naturally, when the mind is pure and
serene, when there is the least agitation in it, the light
emerging through it is steady and properly focussed.
Therefore, the result of the predominant Sattwa in our
mind is ultimately the rediscovery of the Self, the
experience of PURE WISDOM.
GREED, FROM 'RAJAS' --- When the mind is seething
with a constant eruption of desires it will be continuously
in a state of agitation, and, in its natural anxiety to pacify
itself, it has to rush out into the world to procure and fulfil
its endless demands; and in doing so it expresses its greed.
HEEDLESSNESS, DELUSION AND IGNORANCE ARISE
FROM 'TAMAS' --- Inertia or indolence, 'Tamas,' veils the
intellect. The capacity to discriminate between the right
and the wrong, and the ability to reject the wrong and
accept the right, are the privileges of man and not the
impulses of an animal. True manhood comes to manifest
1027

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

only when one's intellect is clean and free from all
shackles of false prejudices and wrong tendencies. Tamas
veils the capacity to perceive rightly the world outside,
and it also destroys our powers of right judgement.
When anything is not properly understood it is but
natural that we will misunderstand it. This
misunderstanding of the world outside compels us to
expect joys, which are impossible to arise from the
miserable state of our imperfections. Can there be even a
single cup of sweet-water in the entire expanse of the
saline-waters of the ocean? In a world of change and pain,
how can there be constant joy, or even one instance of
perfect happiness?
And yet, he who is under the deluding effects of Tamas in
himself, miscalculates the world and expects from it these
experiences, which are impossible, and in the delusion,
curses the world for its imperfections!
MOREOVER:
18. Those who are abiding in SATTWA go upwards; the
RAJASIC dwell in the middle; and the TAMASIC, abiding in
the function of the lowest GUNA, go downwards.
In the ladder of evolution, we can conceive of these stages
of development. The lowest state of development is seen
in the vegetable and the animal kingdoms. The middle
1028

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

stage of evolution is seen in man who has intelligence,
health and brightness. And a higher state of existence is
seen in the disembodied heavenly beings. Here evolution
means: "a greater awareness of experience, a lesser
amount of agitations and a sharper power of intelligence."
The yard-stick used here to measure evolution is the
quantity of joy or happiness, peace or bliss, experienced
by the being.
No doubt, in this measurement, the stone-life is of zero
evolution, inasmuch as it has no awareness at all of the
world. The plant-life comes next, wherein Consciousness
has dimly started expressing Itself. In the animal
kingdom, this Awareness has become clearer and more
vivid. Of the animals, man is, no doubt, the greatest being
with the fullest Consciousness and the sharpest intellect.
But, man also has his own limitations, and functions only
within a limited field of time and space. The ample
possibilities reached when once these limitations of man
are broken down are indicated as the greatest state of
existence enjoyed by beings of a still higher evolution, and
they are called the "Denizens of Heaven."
Every double-storeyed house must also have its staircase.
Invariably, after climbing a few steps, there is a landing
from which we turn and climb up the rest of the stairs to
reach the rooms on the first floor. Those who are standing
on the lower flight of steps are considered of a lower
evolution. Those who are standing on the landing are of
the middle type and those who are standing on the top1029

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

flights are of the highest evolution. The vegetable and the
animal kingdoms stand on the lower rungs. Man stands
on the landing and the Higher Beings on the upper flights
of steps.
Remember, none of them has reached upstairs to enjoy the
comforts of its halls and rooms. Those who are standing
on the landing. have the freedom either to go up or to go
down. If this picture has come into our mind, we have, to
a large extent, understood the concept of evolution as
conceived by Hindu - Philosophy, wherein "the evolution
of a specimen is always measured by the degree of
Consciousness unveiled through Matter in the given
subject under observation."
THE SATTWA-ABIDING GO UPWARDS --- Those who
are living a pure life of discrimination, clear thinking,
right judgement and self-discipline, cultivate more and
more Sattwa in themselves. When the mind is thus kept in
quietude, at once creative and dynamic, it evolves
upwards.
THE RAJASIC DWELL IN THE MIDDLE --- Those who
are of Rajasic nature, with all their desires and agitations,
ambitions and achievements, again and again manifest as
men until they acquire the required purity.
THE TAMASIC GO DOWNWARDS --- Those who are
revelling in misconceptions, heedless of the higher calls in
themselves, deluded by their own lust and passion,
1030

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

existing in a state of drowsiness and inertness, devolve
themselves into the lower natures.
The stanza is only summarising the ideas expressed
earlier, when Krishna discussed the effects of the gunas
even in the continuity of existence after death. But where
then is the release? That even Sattwa binds us with our
attachment to knowledge and happiness has been already
explained. Then when can I be free? All these three,
Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas, are gunas meaning "ropes," that
bind us down to the flesh and its sorrows, the world and
its imperfections, the mind and its agitations, the intellect
and its throbbings. When is man free to enjoy the
Godhood, as a being totally released from all his contacts
with the pluralistic world and from all his subtle
attachments to it?
So far we were told at length of the nature of the gunas, of
the symptoms from which the most predominating guna
in us can be diagnosed, of their reactions in our life, and of
how they affect our future, etc. We were told that the
predominant gunas in us is the heritage which we gather
from our past and the present is coloured by it and the
future again is determined by the play of these gunas. All
these are but explanations of the causes of bondage --- a
sense of bondage rooted in illusion, arising from the fact
that the Self in us gets identified with the Matter-vestures
around it.

1031

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The experience of the finite world, the misery of the jerks,
the sorrows of its imperfections, the tragedies of its
disappointments --- all together constitute the samsara of
the "ego," which is nothing other than the Infinite Self
(Purusha), expressing through Matter (Prakriti), and
identifying with it. Release can be had only when we
transcend all the gunas.
A patient is suffering from high temperature, excruciating
headache and back pain. All three are symptoms of his
illness. When the fever is down the patient is still
suffering. We can say the patient has fully recovered, not
when these three symptoms have ended, but only when
the patient has also regained his old health and energy.
Similarly, the three gunas may be present in each of us, in
different proportions, but the true release comes not only
when all chains have been snapped --- meaning all the
gunas are transcended --- but when we are also established
in the Spiritual Experience.
This process of escaping from the subjective shackles on
our psychological and intellectual nature is called
"liberation" or Moksha. Bound by their own limitations, the
greater possibilities in us are now idling away in our own
bosoms. To redeem them from their prison-houses of
confusions and pains, agitations and sorrows, passions
and lust, is all that spirituality seeks.

1032

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

TO DESCRIBE THE PATH OF LIBERATION AND
EXPLAIN "MOKSHA" GAINED, FROM A RIGHT
JUDGEMENT OF THE WORLD OUTSIDE, THE
LORD SAYS:
19. When the Seer beholds no agent other than the GUNAS and
knows him who is higher than the GUNAS, he attains to My
Being.
The thought that was developed so far has indeed painted
a miserable picture of the Spirit inescapably entangled in
the three gunas. A student of the Geeta would, at this
stage, perhaps, feel despaired at a false idea that there
may be no escape at all for him. One who is standing in a
running train is himself constantly on the move even
though he is standing motionless! As long as he is
travelling on the train, the movement of the train is also
his movement. But the moment he alights and stands on
the platform the train alone moves, and not he. So too, the
Spirit identifying Itself with, and therefore, riding on the
mind-intellect-equipment, dances to the moods of the
mind determined by the three gunas. To stand apart from
the mind by ending all our identifications with it, is to get
complete freedom from the thraldom of our thought
entanglements.
WHEN THE SEER BEHOLDS --- This art of disentangling
ourselves from our own thought-processes within, is the
1033

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

very art of meditation. A meditator, who is capable of
doing so, will BEHOLD, EXPERIENCE SUBJECTIVELY,
the State of Pure Knowledge, uncontaminated by the
dance of the thoughts. It is called "seeing," not in the sense
one is seeing a table or a chair; God cannot be seen; He is
not an "object" of our perception, or feeling, or thought.
He is the "SUBJECT," that PERCEIVES through us, that
FEELS in us, that THINKS with us. But here the word
"behold" is used only to indicate that the subjective
experience shall be so total, so complete and so
convincing, as when we have actually "SEEN" an object --that afterwards there can be no more any speculations
about such an experience! Having seen a thing, no man
can ever have any doubt regarding the appearance of the
thing he has seen.
NO AGENT OTHER THAN THE GUNAS --- The
experiencer of the Self not only realises himself to be the
Infinite but also understands that his ego, which was
previously claiming to be the agent in all his activities,
was none other than these gunas themselves. Gunas
govern and direct the entire thought-life at all times in
everyone of us and, therefore, gunas, here means the very
SUBTLE-BODY. When we say "a crowded assembly of
intelligence" we mean intelligent men. Similarly, please
note carefully, gunas here means the MINDS of
individuals of distinct and differing temperaments.
AND KNOWS HIM WHO WHICH IS HIGHER THAN
THE GUNAS --- The mind cannot function of its own
1034

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

accord, nor can it perceive by itself its feelings, it being a
by-product of inert matter. Consciousness which functions
in and through the mind, making it brilliant and dynamic
must be a principle that is other than the mind. If a bucket
of water looks like molten silver, it must have borrowed
the brilliance from the Sun or the moon, for it to shine
forth. Water in itself has no brilliance. Now, if the
reflection dances or breaks up, it must be because of the
nature of the water in the bucket and not because the Sun
itself is dancing in the sky! The Consciousness reflecting in
the mind is the "agent," the individualised ego (jiva) in us,
who suffers the sense of self-shatterings.
He who has understood that he is not "the reflection in his
own mind" but that which is reflected therein --something other than the mind and therefore something
higher than the gunas --- he is the one who has escaped
forever the shackles of all limitations, the tears of all
sorrows and the sighs of all disappointments.
HE ATTAINS TO MY BEING --- An individual who has
thus transcended his own mind and intellect and has
positively rediscovered himself to be that which was
lending to his own mind the capacity to delude himself,
that Man-of-Wisdom becomes the Self. Lord Krishna is
not to be confused with Shri Krishna, the son of Devaki, or
the Divine Flute-player of Vrindavana. He is talking here
as the Life in every one of us and each student of the
Geeta must understand that his own life is talking to the
confused ego within himself.
1035

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

A WAKER creates sorrowful situations in himself and
comes to fear and weep, lose and gain, mourn and smile
in his dream. All his joys and sorrows belong to the
"dreamer" in himself. When awake, the dream and the
dream-sorrows end, and the "dreamer" himself becomes
the "waker." If, to the "dreamer" in his sorrows, the
waking-consciousness were to manifest and advise, it
would have repeated this stanza to the "dreamer": "When
you, the dreamer, behold no agent other than the
dreaming mind and know in yourself that which is higher
than the dreaming mind, you shall attain to My being --the waking consciousness."
Similarly here, Krishna, the manifested GodConsciousness is explaining to man that his ego-centric
life and activities, its sorrows and joys, achievements and
despairs --- all belong to the waker-dreamer-sleeperpersonality and on transcending them all, he shall really
AWAKE to the Truth, and there BECOME one with It. A
dreamer, on waking, cannot still remain a dreamer but
must himself become the waker. Similarly, Spirit
entangled in Matter is man and, man disentangled from
its Matter identifications not only rediscovers but also
becomes the Spirit; "ATTAINS TO MY BEING."
NOW THE LORD PROCEEDS TO TEACH HOW ONE
CAN ATTAIN THIS GREAT GOAL:

1036

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

20. The embodied-one having crossed beyond these three
GUNAS out of which the body is evolved, is freed from birth,
death, decay and pain, and attains to Immortality.
So long as you stand near the open oven in the kitchen,
you must necessarily feel the heat of the fire and the
smoke in the atmosphere. To walk out of the kitchen is to
escape both these inconveniences because heat and smoke
are the properties of fire in the oven and not the qualities
of the atmosphere. In burning summer, out in your
courtyard, there is both heat and glare, to escape which,
you have only to walk into the shelter of your room. So
too, identifying ourselves with the gunas and thus playing
in the mental and intellectual zones, we suffer the
imperfections and sorrows of an ordinary life. But when
these are transcended we shall no more be under the
tyranny of these sorrows. Finitude and agitations,
mortality and pangs, change and sorrow are not in the
Perfect, Immortal, Changeless Self.
HAVING CROSSED THE THREE 'GUNAS' OUT OF
WHICH THE BODY IS EVOLVED --- The three gunas are
the expressions of 'ignorance'or NESCIENCE, which
constitutes the very causal-body. We are experiencing the
pure causal-body in our deep-sleep, and this is nothing
other than the gunas. They emerge from the causal-body to
express themselves first as the subtle-body, expressing as
qualities of our thoughts and feeling, and again as the
gross-body to express themselves into good, bad, or
indifferent actions.
1037

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

If the art in me is to be expressed in colours, I need the
canvas and the brushes. If I am a musician, I need musical
instruments and accompaniments to express my art. Each
artist employs appropriate instruments to express himself.
A violin in the hands of a painter, and a brush with colour
and canvas in the hands of a musician are both useless
because they are not the media of expression for them. If
my thoughts are dull and animalistic, it would be sorrow
for me to bear the physical body of man. Thus, each bodyplant, animal or man --- is the exact instrument given for
the full expression of its subtle-body. And the nature and
quality of the subtle-body are determined by the texture of
the causal-body, consisting of the gunas.
It is, therefore, evident that, those who have gone beyond
the gunas, are no more under the tragedies of the subtle
and the causal-bodies.
THE EMBODIED ONE IS FREED FROM BIRTH, DEATH,
DECAY AND PAIN --- As we said earlier, the heat and
smoke are the qualities of the fire in the oven and as long
as we are near the oven, we suffer from these hardships.
Matter changes forever and these changes have been
systematised into definite stages. They are common to all
bodies everywhere. These stages are birth, growth, decay,
disease and death. These five stages are common to all.
Each one is a packet of pain; birth is painful, growth is
agonizing, decay is disturbing, disease is tyrannical and
death is terrible indeed!
1038

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

But all these sorrows are only the sorrows of Matter and
not of the Consciousness that illumines them. One, who
has realised himself to be the Awareness, transcends all
these sorrows. The Sun may illumine floods, famine, war,
pestilence, funerals, marriages and a million varieties of
happenings, and yet, none of them is IN the Sun.
Similarly, the Consciousness in us illumines the various
changes in our matter-envelopments, but they do not
appertain to the Spirit. Therefore, he who has realised
himself to be the Spirit, goes beyond all these struggles.
AND ATTAINS TO IMMORTALITY --- Not only does the
man of realisation experience the absence of sorrow but he
also lives the positive joy of perfection. This is indicated
by this phrase. In deep-sleep, a man in his sick bed forgets
his pain; the disappointed one escapes his
disappointment; the hungry no more feels his hunger; and
the sad is no longer sorrowful. But, thereby, the illness is
not cured, the disappointment is not removed, the hunger
is not satisfied, the sorrow is not mitigated. Sleep is a
temporary truce with the existing world of sorrows
within. On waking, the sorrows too return; but the State of
Bliss experienced at the moment of realisation of the Self is
not a mere temporary cessation of sorrows of life, but it is
a vivid experience of the Changeless, Infinite Nature.
Hence it is said here that one experiences the State of
Immortality even while living in this very same
embodiment.

1039

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is, indeed, a rare experience to be a God-man upon the
earth. What then are the marks of such a liberated soul, so
that we may understand him and also recognise this State
in ourselves? How will he conduct himself in society and
what exactly will be the relationship of such a Master
living the God-experience, with the world outside?
ARJUNA GETS AN OCCASION FOR ASKING THESE
QUESTIONS REGARDING THE NATURE AND
BEHAVIOUR OF SUCH A GOD-MAN:
Arjuna said: 21. What are the marks of him who has crossed
over the three GUNAS, O Lord? What is his conduct, and how
does he go beyond these three GUNAS?
The Geeta is written in a conversational style, to remove
the tedium unavoidable in the early studies of any
philosophy, and to make it more entertaining. In this
conversation between the Lord of Perfect Knowledge and
the mortal of extreme delusion, Vyasa, the poet, has
evidently not forgotten the human element in his
philosophical pre-occupation. In any Hall of Knowledge,
the questions of Arjuna sound like some childish
inquisitive-ness, the play of some intellectual pranks. The
patience with which the Lord answers all the questions of
the lesser types of intellect, clearly indicated the duties of
a true Brahmana in answering exhaustively al the
questions raised by the sceptic, nay even by the nonbelievers.
1040

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Even though we are blessed by such a healthy tradition in
our literature, somehow, a cruel spirit of secrecy has come
to rob this healthy spirit from our glorious culture.
Philosophical ideas putrefy when they are not properly
ventilated. Every disciple has the full freedom to seek, first
of all, to understand properly the logic of the philosophy.
Understanding alone can give rise to a true appreciation,
and unless we appreciate an idea, we will never be able to
live it in our day-to-day life. The Hindu philosophy is a
WAY OF LIFE, and therefore, it is essentially to be lived.
Arjuna asks here three definite questions: (1) What are the
marks by which a man who has gone beyond the
influences of these three gunas can be recognised? and, (2)
what would be, in that State-of-Perfection, his relationship
with the world outside and how is his behaviour among
us who are still under the persecutions of the three gunas?
and, lastly, (3) how does such a Man-of-Perfection
conquer his inner confusions and entanglements and
attain spiritual glory?
THE LORD PROCEEDS TO ANSWER ALL THESE
QUESTIONS IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS. FIRST,
HE ENUMERATES THE CHARACTERISTIC MARKS BY
WHICH WE CAN RECOGNISE ONE WHO HAS
CROSSED THE THREE GUNAS:

1041

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Blessed Lord said: 22. Light, activity, and delusion, when
present, O Pandava, he hates not, nor longs for them when
absent.
In answering the first question of Arjuna, the Lord tries to
explain how the man of right understanding does not hate
the effects of the three gunas when they are clearly present
in his inner life; nor does he long for them when they have
disappeared. Equanimity is the essence of perfection and a
Man-of-Knowledge is ever in perfect balance. He craves
for nothing, nor does he strive to acquire anything new.
To have and not to have --- both are equal to him, because
he is beyond both, living a life of inward peace which is
totally independent of all environments.
LIGHT ACTIVITY AND DELUSION, WHEN PRESENT,
HE HATES NOT --- The three terms LIGHT, ACTIVITY
and DELUSION are the effects of their respective causes,
the predominance of "Sattwa," of "Rajas" and of "Tamas."
The three gunas are indicated here by their effects. Their
presence within him, does not create in him either any
special attachment nor any particular aversion. Whether
his mind and intellect are under the influence of Rajas or
Tamas, even when he feels agitated or deluded, he is not in
the least affected by them, and therefore, he hates them
not. It is only in the absence of Self-Knowledge, that one
hates them.
He who has risen above the gunas, is unaffected when
they appear in his mind. No doubt, a man who is Sattwic
1042

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

develops an attachment for its essential peace and
serenity, its thrills and joys, and he hates when this
inward joy is disturbed by agitations (Rajas) or by dullness
(Tamas).
NOR LONGS FOR THEM WHEN ABSENT --- Not only
has he no particular attachment for them, but also, he is
not at all worried by their absence, because he has risen
much above these three gunas, and they, together or
severally, have nothing to offer him which he has not
already gained! To a millionaire, it is immaterial whether
or not he gets, by chance, a 25-paise coin on the roadside.
He may stoop down and pick it up but he would never
congratulate himself for it as much as a poor man would
do under the same circumstances.
Thus, he who has extricated himself from the
entanglements of the gunas, has transcended fully the
equipments of the mind and intellect and lives the infinite
joys of the Self. To him, the ordinary vehicles of joys and
sorrows can no more supply any special quota of
experiences. Ever steady and balanced, he lives beyond all
storms and clouds in a realm of unbroken peace and
brilliance. He conquers the world of Pure Awareness --attains the State of Godhood.
NOW FOLLOWS AN EXHAUSTIVE ANALYSIS AND
VIVID DESCRIPTION OF THE CONDUCT OF HIM
WHO HAS RISEN ABOVE THE 'GUNAS':
1043

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

23. He who, seated like one unconcerned, is not moved by the
'GUNAS, ' who, knowing that the 'GUNAS' operate, is selfcentred and swerves not . . .
In this section, constituted of the following three verses,
we have an exhaustive picture of the relationship that a
Man-of-Perfection maintains with the things and beings of
the world. A man's culture may be a false mask. Many of
us can act the part of God as long as the situations around
us are not too tempting. A man may not be a tyrant as
long as he has no power; he may live a quiet life, as long
as he is poor; he may be above corruption, as long as he
has no seducing chances. Thus, many good qualities
which we attribute to many people around, are all a
falsely painted, superficial beauty, concealing behind its
artifice a weak and unhealthy personality.
Potential devils stalk about in the world in the borrowed
garbs of artificial raiment. Therefore, the real test of a
Perfect One is not in the jungle or in a cave, but in the
market-place where he is teased by the mischiefs of the
world. Christ was never so great as when he was nailed to
the cross! The true nature in us will come out only when
we are crushed; the fragrance of chandana (Sandal wood)
emerges only when rubbed; Tulasi (Ocimum) leaves leave
their fragrance on the very fingers that crush them.
HE WHO, SEATED LIKE ONE UNCONCERNED, IS
NOT MOVED BY THE GUNAS --- In all his experiences in
1044

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the world, good, bad or indifferent, he is unconcerned,
since he knows that it is the play of the mind and intellect.
In a cinema hall, the tragedies and comedies on the screen
need not affect us, since we know that it is a show put up
for our entertainment. This does not mean that the Seer is
totally unconcerned with the happenings of the world.
Vyasa is very careful in his choice of expression. He says
that
the
Man-of-Perfection
looks
"LIKE
ONE
UNCONCERNED." That is to say, he is not in the least
agitated; nor does he become hysterical by anything that is
happening around him in life.
WHO, KNOWING THAT THE 'GUNAS' OPERATE --- He
understands that the changes in his own inward
personality are all nothing but the kaleidoscopic changes
of the gunas and that the world outside changes according
to one's mental conditions. A man of True Wisdom lives,
ever fully aware of the technique behind the changes in
himself and in the world around him.
IS SELF-CENTERED AND SWERVES NOT --- In order to
watch the play of the three gunas in himself, he should be
an observer from beyond the gunas. Thus, established in
his Pure Spiritual Nature, he is able to observe detachedly
and enjoy the play of the gunas in himself and in the world
around him. An observer of a street fight, looking down
from his balcony, is not affected by what he observes; so
too, the Man-of-Wisdom, awakened to the Spiritual
Consciousness, swerves not from his consummate
equilibrium, when he witnesses the play of the gunas in
1045

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

himself and ever remains established in his own Divine
Nature (ava-tishthati).
CONTINUING TO ELUCIDATE THE THOUGHT
SUGGESTED IN THE PREVIOUS STANZA, THE LORD
SAYS:
24. Alike in pleasure and pain; who dwells in the Self; to whom
a clod of earth, a precious stone and gold are alike; to whom the
dear and the not-dear are the same; firm; the same in censure
and self-praise. . . .
The equanimity and balance of personality which are
observed in a Perfect Man, in the midst of the changing
vicissitudes of life, are brought out in this stanza. One
who has gone beyond the tyrannies of the three gunas
lives in a kingdom of his own, wherein neither the thrills
of Sattwa, nor the noisy clamours of Rajas, nor the
weariness of Tamas have any admission at all. Serenely
self-composed, he dwells in the Self, far away from the
sweat and agitations of base appetites, low impulses and
selfish passions.
To the average man, this state of equipoise may look like
complete death. And, no doubt, it is so; it is the death of
the limited, finite life of relative experiences, lived by the
baser ego. Spirit, conditioned by Matter, behaves like a
reed upon the tumultuous surface of an ever-agitated
mind. Always disturbed by the constant storms of love
1046

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and hate, likes and dislikes, this unhappy sense-onindividuality suffers its shattering agitations and endless
sorrows.
To withdraw, therefore, from this chaotic field of desires
and attachments into the shelter of the Self, is to release
the diviner possibilities in ourselves. The dreamer dies to
be reborn as the waker; the individual sense of the ego
dies to release the infinite glories of the Self.
Having awakened from the dream, what would be the
waker's relationship with his dream-world, is the question
that Arjuna asks Krishna! One who has gone beyond the
shackles of the three gunas, has awakened from all the
misconceptions of the world, fed by one's 'I'-ness and 'my'ness. In that state of godly awakening, there cannot be any
deep and sincere relationship with the experiences of the
lower world, whether it be joy or sorrow, things dear or
not-dear, blame or praise. In all the experiences, he is a
balanced, unattached witness.
WHO DWELLS IN THE SELF (Svasthah) --- One who has
transcended the gunas that rule the tendencies of the
mind, becomes the Self, just as one who has crossed the
frontiers of a dream, discovers himself to be waker. What
would be the relationship of one who dwells in the Self,
with the things around him, and what would be his
attitude to things happening around him, is being
answered here. Established as he is in Supreme Wisdom,
the world that is contacted from the levels of the body, the
1047

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mind and the intellect does not touch him. He lives in a
world of his own, far above the plane of Matter.
ALIKE IN PLEASURE AND IN PAIN --- To come in
contact with the outside world through sense-perceptions,
to evaluate them in terms of similar experiences in the
past, and to experience pleasure or pain, is a trick of our
individual personality. The worlds of stimuli march into
us and we respond to them and these intelligent responses
can fall under two categories: pleasure and pain. That
which is pleasurable to one is bound to be painful to
another. If the things of the world were in their own
nature either pleasurable or painful, they would have
certainly caused the same uniform reactions in all of us.
It is the nature of the Sun to be hot, and therefore, the heat
of the Sun is common to us all. But the things of the world
do not produce reactions in everyone in the same way,
and therefore, it is an interpretation of our mind and
intellect, which is coloured by our own past experiences.
He who is not looking at the world through these
coloured goggles of the mind and intellect will be alike in
pleasure and pain.
REGARDING A CLOD OF EARTH, A PRECIOUS STONE
AND GOLD ALIKE --- Possession of things is another
appetite which the majority of living creatures have.
People like to possess and hoard precious-stones or gold,
but do not care for a clod of mud. But to an awakened
Man-of-Wisdom, all these possessions are one and the
1048

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

same and from his estimation none of them has any real
value.
Children collect peacock feathers, shells, marbles, broken
glass-bangles, old stamps, shapely stones, etc., from the
roadside or from waste-paper baskets, and with extreme
possessiveness, they keep them as their precious
possessions. But as they grow, without a regret, they
throw them away and the younger ones in the family
accept them with gratitude as a precious inheritance from
their elders. Similarly, a man living his ego-centric life of
desires for possessions, may value gold and precious
stones; but to the Awakened Soul, in his sense of
Infinitude, these limited possessions, hugged on to by
lesser minds, have no charm at all.
THE SAME TOWARDS THINGS DEAR AND THINGS
NOT-DEAR --- In our relationship with others, where
there is an agreeable nature, we come to love it dearly,
while, wherever there is a disagreeable nature, we hate it.
Love and hate, dear and not-dear, are all our reactions to
the agreeable and disagreeable natures of things or
situations. These reactions are, no doubt, from the levels
of the mind. One who is standing on windy shores
wearing a thick coat will not feel the cold that another
must feel, when, in his nakedness, he is dipping in the sea.
the cold waters come in contact with the skin of the naked
man and he experiences the discomforts, while the man on
the shore, comfortably warm in his coat, knows no cold.
1049

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The average man, plunged in identification with his own
mind and intellect, suffers the world and interprets it as
agreeable or disagreeable, and brings down upon himself
a lot of confusions and problems. The man of Steady
Wisdom is he, whose equilibrium is not disturbed by the
onslaught of things and circumstances of the world,
whether they be dear or not dear.
SAME IN CENSURE AND IN PRAISE --- A Man-ofPerfection is the same in censure and praise. The
experience of a dream cannot contribute either joy or
sorrow to one who has "awakened," he might have been a
beggar insulted by the entire society in the dream-world
or might have been an adored Raja ruling a vast empire in
his dream. But when he wakes up, neither the PRAISE he
received as a Raja, nor the CENSURE he suffered as a
beggar can leave any reactions upon him. Awakened from
the "dream", the Man-of-Wisdom evaluates the blame and
praise of the world outside and finds them both utterly
insignificant.
In the above four beautiful, chosen phrases, Vyasa has
indicated some of the main conditions of life in which the
ordinary man comes to eke out his joys and sorrows.
Pleasure and pain, good and bad possessions, agreeable
and disagreeable experiences, joys and sorrows provided
by praise and censure, are some of the conditions of life by
which we get entangled in a web of agitations and
sorrows.
1050

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

MOREOVER:
25. The same in honour and dishonour; the same to friend and
foe; abandoning all undertakings --- he is said to have crossed
beyond the GUNAS.
If the above has drawn a flat picture of the Man-ofPerfection, herein we have added strokes that shade the
outlines and give them a rounded beauty to depict them
vividly for our keener observation and closer vision.
THE SAME IN HONOUR AND DIS-HONOUR --- The
sense of equanimity in honour and dis-honour is
described here as one of the definite signs of perfection
attained. Rooted in his own lived experiences of divinity,
a man of Vision is not afraid of life and its rewards,
because, such a Perfect One looks at things and
happenings from his own special angle. The egoistic
evaluation of life tends to respect honour and shun
dishonour.
Even in ordinary life, we have found martyrs courting
what others consider as dishonour. They energetically
love and serve their generation in spite of the insults and
disgrace piled upon them by ignorant people. For
Archimedes, running along the streets naked from his
bath-tub crying "Eureka," "Eureka," might have been a
dishonour on any other day except on that day of his
discovery! Honour and dishonour are the evaluations of
1051

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the intellect that change from time to time, from place to
place. To one who has transcended the ordinary planes of
egoism and vanity, both are the same; a crown of thorns is
as welcome as a crown of roses!!
THE SAME TO FRIEND AND FOE --- To one who treads
the Path of Wisdom and has risen above the gunas, there is
no foe in the world; nor is he attached to anyone in earthy
friendships. My right hand is never a foe to me; nor is it
merely a friend; it is myself. Another, other than myself,
alone can claim enmity or friendship with me. When I
have realised the ONENESS of my spiritual nature,
Infinite and All-pervading, as the Spirit, I have no
relationship with the world outside; I live my vivid
personal experience: "THEY ARE I."
ABANDONING ALL UNDERTAKINGS --- The man of
tranquillity, living in God-consciousness, has no more ego
in him, nor is he pestered by the endless ego-centric
desires which are the sorrows of life. Desire-motivated
activities, undertaken with an anxiety to earn and to
acquire, to possess and to hoard, to aggrandise and to
claim ownership are indicated by the term "undertaking."
All these are possible only when the ego is there. When
the limited ego-sense has volatilised in the realisation of
the Infinite, all ego-motivated activities also end.
Thereafter, he, the God-inspired, works in the world as a
God-man.

1052

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

HE IS SAID TO HAVE GONE BEYOND THE GUNAS --The above three stanzas together paint the complete
picture of one who has transcended the gunas. These three
stanzas answer Arjuna's second question.
Shankara recognises in these three stanzas "A RULE OF
CONDUCT LAID DOWN FOR THE SAMNYASIN WHO
SEEKS MOKSHA." These qualities are to be cultivated by
every SEEKER who is trying to live the Hindu-culture.
Once the seeker has gained inner freedom, these become
the characteristic features of his nature. They form the
essential marks that indicate one who has risen above the
gunas.
THE LORD PROCEEDS NEXT TO ANSWER THE
QUESTION "HOW DOES ONE TRANSCEND THE
GUNAS?"
26. And he, serving Me with unswerving devotion, and
crossing beyond the GUNAS, is fit to become BRAHMAN.
Being a practical text-book of religion, the Geeta is never
satisfied by giving mere philosophical discourses. Every
discourse, after explaining a definite aspect of our
philosophy, prescribes immediately a way of training by
which the imperfect can aspire to be and ultimately
achieve Perfection.

1053

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

HE WHO SERVES ME WITH UNSWERVING
DEVOTION --- Love for God is called "devotion." Our
minds revel readily and with pleasure wherever there is
love. Our entire nature is fed by our thoughts, and, as the
thoughts, so the mind. To contemplate steadily upon the
Infinite Nature of the Self is, ultimately, to become the
Self, and thus end our limited, mortal ego.
Contemplation upon the nature of the Lord in all sincerity
and intensity cannot be maintained effectively at all times.
As we are today, we are not capable of maintaining the
mind in a state of meditation all the time. Therefore,
Krishna, knowing this weakness of man, advises a
practical method of maintaining this thought for a longer
period of time through the process of dedicated service
(seva). That all work, if intelligently undertaken in a spirit
of dedication and service, can be readily converted into a
worship, has already been explained in Chapter-III. This
clearly and evidently shows that mere devotion to the
Lord is not enough. The Gita Acharya expects his devotees
to bring religion from the Pooja-rooms and temples to the
fields of their every-day-life of activities and in all their
contacts with others around.
Such a practice of constant God-awareness and dedicated
service removes the agitations of the mind and tunes up
the inner instrument for a more efficient flight through
meditation. Tamas and Rajas get more and more reduced,
and thereby the proportion of Sattwa in the seeker's subtle
constitution increases. And such a seeker "IS FIT TO
1054

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

BECOME BRAHMAN." Such an individual who has
gained a wealth of Sattwa in his inward composition will
discover in himself a greater ability and poise during his
meditation. The re-awakening to the consciousness of the
Self cannot then
be very far off.
Here, it is said that the seeker is fit for becoming Brahman.
To realise Brahman is to become Brahman, to realise the
waker, is to become the waker.
HOW CAN THE SAGE HIMSELF BE BRAHMAN?
LISTEN:
27. For I am the Abode of BRAHMAN, the Immortal and the
Immutable, of everlasting DHARMA and of Absolute Bliss.
In describing the Yoga of Devotion and its ultimate goal,
the Geeta has already indicated: (XII-8) "YOU SHALL NO
DOUBT LIVE IN ME THEREAFTER"; and the devotee,
under the inspiration of his love, will forget himself as a
separate individual, and his mind will merge with his
point-of-contemplation, the Lord. In the previous stanza,
we were told, "HE WHO SERVES ME WITH
UNSWERVING YOGA-OF-DEVOTION", will steadily
transcend his identification with his Matter-envelopments.
To the extent the ego dies, to that extent the experience of
the Divine can manifest. To retire from waking is to enter
1055

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the hall-of-sleep; and while one is dozing, one is walking
further and further away from the realm-of-wakefulness
and proportionately entering the peaceful abode-of-sleep.
To leave completely one plane-of-Consciousness, is to
enter entirely into another plane of Consciousness. The
waker himself totally becomes the DREAMER and the
DREAMER knows no waking-state. The DREAMER ends
his dream when he either wakes up to the world or slides
into the joys of peaceful slumber. There is no transaction
across the frontiers of these distinct planes-ofConsciousness.
FOR, I AM THE ABODE OF BRAHMAN --- The Self that
vitalises the seeker's bosom is the Pure Consciousness,
that is the same everywhere, "IMMORTAL and
IMMUTABLE, ETERNAL and BLISSFUL." To realise the
Self within, is
to realise the Infinite Self. To taste a piece of cake is to
taste all cakes of all times and for all times, because the
KNOWLEDGE OF the taste of cake is ever the same. In
the realm of experience, if a meditator apprehends the Self
in him, he at once experiences the Omnipresence of the
Self. As long as a pot exists, the pot-space is seen distinct
from the space around. Once the pot is broken, the potspace itself becomes the unbounded space in the Universe;
similarly, when life's false identifications with the body,
mind and intellect are broken down --- in short, when the
ego is dead, the Awareness of the Infinitude rises up to
1056

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

flood the bosom with THE ETERNAL DHARMA AND
THE UNFAILING BLISS.
Shri Shankara, in his extremely rational and analytical
commentary, gives for this stanza three alternative
interpretations, each one not contrary to the others, but
each one elucidating more and more the philosophical
contents of this verse. Shankara says "BRAHMAN IS
PARAMATMAN, IMMORTAL AND INDESTRUCTIBLE.
HE ABIDES IN ME WHO AM THE SELF (PRATYAGATMAN). THAT BEING THE SELF, ONE RECOGNISES,
BY RIGHT KNOWLEDGE, THE IDENTITY OF THE SELF
IN ONESELF AND THE SELF EVERYWHERE."
Shankara gives an alternative meaning to the verse: "IT IS
THROUGH THE POWER (MAYA) INHERENT IN
BRAHMAN, AS ISHWARA, THAT HE SHOWS GRACE
TO HIS DEVOTEES. I AM THAT POWER IN
MANIFESTATION, AND THEREFORE, BRAHMAN AM
I."
Again, as another alternative interpretation, he suggests a
third meaning which, as we said earlier, is not contrary to
the former two suggestions, but, in fact, paints in greater
detail, the beauty of the stanza and its contents. "BY
BRAHMAN IS MEANT HERE THE 'CONDITIONEDBRAHMAN'; WHO ALONE CAN BE SPOKEN OF BY
SUCH WORD AS 'BRAHMAN'... CONDITIONEDBRAHMAN ALONE CAN BE CONCEIVED OF IN THE
FINITE INTELLECT, PERCEIVED BY THE MIND AND
1057

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

EXPRESSED THROUGH LANGUAGE AS A CONTRAST
TO MATTER. Here the term Brahman only means Spirit as
opposed in nature to inert Matter. Thus, Matter and Spirit,
both factors conceived by the limited intellect, are limited
and so finite objects of knowledge. But both are known by
the Consciousness, the Supreme. Therefore "I, THE
UNCONDITIONED AND THE UNUTTERABLE, AM
THE ABODE OF THE CONDITIONED-BRAHMAN,
WHO IS IMMORTAL AND INDESTRUCTIBLE."
The Illuminator is always different from the illumined.
The "subject" is the knower, and the "object" is the known.
Krishna, the Infinite, represents the Eternal Subject, and
therefore, He is the Abode of all "objects," including the
concept of the Self which is the Spirit that vitalises and
gives a similitude of sentiency and appearance of activity
to all the Matter-envelopments. The conditioned Brahman
(sa-upadhika) rests upon the Consciousness that is aware of
it, which is the Unconditioned (nir-upadhika) Brahman.
In the following chapter (XV-16, 17 and 18) it will be
explained as the three Atmans: Anatman, Jivatman and
Paramatman.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious BhagawadGeeta, in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of
YOGA , in the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the
fourteenth discourse ends entitled: THE YOGA OF GUNAS
Om Om Om Om Om
1058

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 15
Purushothama Yoga
The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit
The Blessed Lord said: 1. They (wise people) speak of the
indestructible ASHWATTHA tree as having its roots above
and branches below, whose leaves are the VEDAS ; he who
knows it, is alone a Veda-knower.
Reminiscent of the casual picture of the "Peepal-tree"
brought up in the Kathopanishad (VI-1), here Vyasa
exhaustively paints the Tree-of-life and shows its
relationship with the Infinite. If the Spirit be one-withouta-second, out of this one Consciousness how did the
world-of-matter --- constituted of the body and its
perceptions, the mind and its feelings, the intellect and its
thoughts --- arise? Even if it has so risen up, what
nourishes it and sustains it? What exactly is the
relationship between God, the CREATOR, and the world,
the CREATED --- the Infinite and the finite? These are
some of the questions that generally rise up in any human
intellect, once it is set to contemplate upon life.
The picture of the "Peepal-tree" unveiled in these three
stanzas serves as a beautiful allegory of the entire spiritual
concept expounded in this chapter.
1059

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Ashwattha is botanically known as Ficus Religiosa,
popularly called the Peepal-tree, which, according to
some, has gathered its name "because horses used to stand
under its shade (Ashwattha)." According to Shankara, this
tree has been chosen to represent the entire cosmos
because of its derivative meaning --- Shwa means
"tomorrow"; Stha means "that which remains"; therefore:
A-shwattha: "that which will NOT remain the same till
tomorrow." In short, the word indicates the ephemeral,
the ever-changing, world of the phenomena.
It is described here that the Ashwattha-tree has its roots
"up" (Urdhwa). Accepting directly the literal meaning, we
have got some spiritually absurd, religiously mischievous,
and aesthetically ugly 'pictures' of this Tree-of-Samsara,
painted by some illiterate artists, and made easily
available in the Indian markets. It is an insult to the
mighty majesty of this scriptural picture.
According to Anandagiri, Samsara is represented as a tree
(Vriksha) because of the etymological meaning of the
Sanskrit term, Vriksha: "that which can be cut down." The
experiences of change and sorrow which the world-ofplurality gives us can be totally ended through
detachment. The Tree-of-Multiplicity that has seemingly
sprung forth from the Infinite Consciousness Divine, can
be cut down by shifting our attention from the tree to the
Divine.

1060

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Luckily, we who are educated in modern universities,
have a similar use of the term "tree" in our history textbooks. The 'family trees' of kings and dynasties are,
without any exception, shown as branching down from
their ancestral 'source.' Similarly, the Tree-of-Samsara has
its roots UP in the Divine Consciousness. A tree holds
itself up and gets nourished by its roots; similarly, the
"experiences" of change, and the "experiencer" of them, are
all established in the Infinite and draw their sustenance
from It alone.
"Even then," many of our friends doubt, "why is the word
'UP' (Urdhwa) used?" It is used here in the same
connotation as we use the term 'up' in our everyday expressions, like 'HIGH-command': 'HIGHERofficials': 'TOP-men': 'UPPER-class': 'HIGH-class jewellery'
etc. In all these cases, by the term HIGH or UP or TOP, no
geometrical elevation is indicated, but it indicates a
superiority, a greater nobility, or value. Psychologically, it
is natural for man to concede, for the subtler and the
diviner, a HIGHER place of reverence and to consider the
grosser and the devilish as belonging to a LOWER status.
The Perfect is the Highest Consciousness, illumined and
vitalised by which alone can the body-mind-intellect
equipment experience its world of "perception-emotionthought." Naturally, therefore, the world-of-plurality is
allegorically pictured here as the fig-tree --- arising from
and sustained by the Higher Consciousness,
1061

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Reality.
This world-of-change (Ashwattha) is considered here as
eternal (Avyaya), only in a relative sense. Any peepal-tree
in any village must have observed many generations
playing and growing up under its shade, and thus, with
reference to man's average age, the fig-tree can be
considered as RELATIVELY eternal. Similarly, with
reference to the generations that grow, conceive, plan,
strive, achieve and die away, the world itself can be
considered as RELATIVELY immortal.
For this tree-of-life "THE VEDAS THEMSELVES ARE
THE LEAVES" --- Veda means 'knowledge.' Knowledge
does bring forth a greater spurt of dynamism of life into
the world. In comparison with the modern world --- with
its colossal endeavours, mighty achievements, and
superhuman aspirations --- the ancient generations were,
relatively speaking, not even alive. More the knowledge a
generation acquires, clearer becomes its vision of a greater
future and diviner possibilities, and therefore, more is the
amount of effort put forth by it to achieve the perceived
goal. Now to compare Veda-'knowledge,' to the leaves of
the "Tree" is not quite inappropriate. Leaves are areas
from which the water contents get evaporated in all trees,
and this, in its turn, creates the 'osmotic-pressure' in the
roots and facilitates the roots to draw more quantity of
nourishment from the earth. Cut down the leaves of a tree
and its growth is immediately stunted; the larger the
number of branches and leaves, the greater is the tree's
1062

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dimension and growth. Where there is greater knowledge,
there we are sure to find a greater flare of manifest-life.
HE WHO KNOWS IT, IS A KNOWER OF THE VEDA --He alone, who has realised not only the Ashwattha-tree,
but also the Higher, from which it derives its existence, is
the one who has fulfilled his knowledge of the Vedas. The
Vedas indicate the One Eternal Principle from which all
the realms of experience have sprung. Neither pure
science, nor mere devotion, can achieve the Truth of
perfect knowledge, is the conclusion of the Geeta.
Knowledge is perfect only when we know of the here and
the hereafter, of the finite and the Infinite, of the created
and the Creator. All the rest of the pursuits of knowledge,
however spectacular they might be, are, at best, only onesided views of the whole Truth. The Man-of-Perfect'Wisdom,' as conceived by the Vedas, is the knower of both
the PERISHABLE and the IMPERISHABLE; and such a
man alone is recognised by Krishna as the Vedavit --knower of the Vedas.
NOW FOLLOWS ANOTHER FIGURATIVE REPRESENTATION OF THE MEMBERS OF THIS TREE OF
SAMSARA:
2. Below and above are spread its branches, nourished by the
GUNAS; sense-objects are its buds; and below, in the world of
men, stretch forth the roots, originating in action.
1063

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Continuing to paint the picture of the Tree-of-Samsara, we
have here the etching in more details. Such mystical
representations should not be taken too literally, whether
in literature or in art. The very style of the Vedas is
couched in mysticism. Taking any convenient object of the
world and describing it in such a poetic style so as to
express some of the subtler philosophical truths and
thereby to convey some deeper religious message, is
called mysticism.
Describing the Tree-of-life and adding more details to it,
Vyasa says: "UPWARDS AND DOWNWARDS ITS
BRANCHES SPREAD" --- the flow of life in the individual,
as well as in the world, is sometimes towards the higher
evolutionary purposes, but more often it tends to cater to
the lower animal nature. These two tendencies are
significant here when it is said that the branches of the
Tree-of-life grow both "upwards and downwards."
PATTERNED BY THE GUNAS --- These urges for living
the higher and the lower values are maintained and
nourished by the particular type of psychological
tendencies gunas available in the individual. In an earlier
chapter (XIV) the play of the gunas (moods of the mind)
has been exhaustively discussed.
In any tree there are nodular buds which are potential
branches that have not yet developed, but are waiting for
a chance to burst forth. Corresponding to them, Krishna
says, in the Ashwattha-tree, are the sense-objects, the
1064

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

'buds.' It is a fact that in the presence of an 'object' our
tendencies revolt against all our higher concepts and
ideals, and run amuck to gain their gratification: a new
"branch."
DOWNWARD THE ROOTS EXTEND --- If the main root
of the Tree-of-Samsara is lost in the Absolute Reality, High
above, the "secondary roots" which spring from it are
spread all around, and grow even downward, "IN THE
WORLD OF MAN, INITIATING ALL ACTIONS." Here,
secondary roots are thought-channels (vasanas), which are
created in us, and which propel each one of us towards his
own typical actions and reactions in the world. They are
the very causes that promote man's evil as well as
meritorious activities in the world. Just as the main taproot, while spreading its secondary roots, claws the earth
through them and gets the plant well-rooted, so
too, these Samskaras, actions and their reactions, both good
and evil, bind the individuals fast to the earthy plane of
likes and dislikes, of profits and losses, of earning and
spending.
THE FOLLOWING TWO STANZAS INDICATE HOW
WE CAN ANNIHILATE THE TREE AND THEREBY
COME TO EXPERIENCE THE PURE SOURCE OF ALL
LIFE'S MANIFESTATIONS, THE INFINITE LIFE:

1065

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

3. Its form is not perceived here as such, neither its end, nor its
origin, nor its foundation, nor its resting-place; having cut
asunder this firm-rooted ASHWATTHA -tree with the strong
axe of non-attachment. . .
4. Then that Goal should be sought after, where having gone,
none returns again. I seek refuge in that 'primeval PURUSHA'
from which streamed forth, from time immemorial, all activity
(or energy) .
In order that the students may not misunderstand this
mystic symbolism, and take the Tree too literally, the Geeta
acharya owns that 'ITS FORM, AS SUCH, IS NOT
PERCEIVED HERE.' The Tree-of-life, as described in the
previous stanzas, evidently represents the entire field of
manifested life. The subtle Principle of Life manifests
through us, in different planes and in a variety of forms --as perceptions of the body; as emotions and feelings of the
mind; as ideals and thoughts of the intellect; and as mere
non-apprehension of the causal-body. All these vehicles
and their experiences, manifesting in the Infinite Life, in
their totality, constitute the Ashwatth a-tree spreading out
into all quarters. Naturally, therefore, Lord Krishna says
that very few have the comprehensive vision to see them
all as such in one gaze.
Not only are the different vehicles and their expressions
not recognised as such in their entirety, but very few of us
in the world come to recognise "THEIR END OR THEIR
BEGINNING, OR THEIR EXISTENCE.' The Tree-of-life
1066

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

springs from the 'ignorance'of Reality (Avidya) and it ends
on the "realisation of the Self" (Vidya), and it exists only so
long as the mental demands and desires (vasanas)
function. These subjective implications are not generally
perceived, or recognised, or understood, by the majority
of men.
The manifested world constituting the Ashwattha-tree can
be cleft 'BY THE STRONG AXE OF DETACHMENT." The
world of matter is inert and insentient. The experience of
life gained through it is known and lived only because of
the play of Consciousness upon it. As long as the wheels
of a car are geared on to the machine, the vehicle moves.
In case we can clutch the motive-power off from the
moving wheels, the vehicle must necessarily come to its
own natural motionless condition. Similarly, if
Consciousness is withdrawn from the body-mind-intellect
vehicle, its play of perception-emotion-thought must
necessarily halt. This clutching off of Consciousness from
the inert matter vehicles is detachment. With the axe of
detachment, Krishna advises Arjuna, to cut down the tree
of multiple experiences.
At our present level of conscious-existence we are apt to
protest against this advice, because, to us detachment
from these three vehicles is a complete retirement from the
worlds of perception, from the realms of emotion, and
from the fields of thought. In fact, we know no other
world to tread, and therefore, intellectually, we reach but
a state of utter nihilistic nothingness. This is a despairing
1067

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

situation indeed. But Krishna adds, almost in the same
breath, "THEN THAT GOAL SHOULD BE SOUGHT
AFTER, TO WHICH MEN GO AND DO NOT RETURN
AGAIN."
On the whole, the tone of suggestion and the manner of
expression in these two stanzas clearly indicate that the
students who seek the Divine in themselves should learn
to withdraw more and more from their usual dissipations
with perceptions, feelings and thoughts, and must, in "the
still moments of meditation, contemplate upon the Higher
--- the Source from which the Ashwattha-tree itself draws
its sustenance and nourishment.
Had this advice been merely given out and left at that, it
would have been, at best, only a poetic vision, or an
impossible suggestion. As a practical hand-book of
instructions to man on how to live nobly and grow out of
his instinctive weaknesses, the Geeta has to show the
seekers some practical methods of self-improvement at
every stage. And this is accomplished when the stanzas
are closed with a prayer: "I SEEK REFUGE IN THAT
PRIMEVAL PURUSHA WHENCE STREAMED FORTH
THE ANCIENT CURRENT."
The stanza indicates that when our personality has, to a
maximum degree, retired from its extrovert pursuits, the
intellect is to be consciously turned, in an attitude of love
and surrender, to the goal --- the goal from which the
stream of Consciousness flows to the matter-vehicles
1068

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

facilitating them to play their parts. In short, HALT the
manifestations of life, and seek the Eternal Life, the Source
of all expressions of life. What this primeval Purusha is
and how one is to conceive It is the theme of the entire
chapter.
WHAT SORT OF SEEKERS REACH THE GOAL?
LISTEN:
5. Free from pride and delusion, victorious over the evil of
attachment, dwelling constantly in the Self, their desires having
completely retired, freed from the pairs-of-opposites --- such as
pleasure and pain --- the undeluded reach that Goal Eternal.
Philosophy, in India, is something to live and to practise.
Ultimately, it is fulfilled only when we come to experience
its goal. It is natural, therefore, that in our scriptures and
spiritual text-books, we find a wealth of instructions and
elaborate discussions on the theories of Perfection. This
stanza is a typical example of the detailed instructions
supplied to guide the adventurous seekers trying to
follow the "path." Five conditions are explained herein
which are nothing but certain disciplines, adjustments,
and re-education of the vehicles of life; and Krishna
concludes that those who have accomplished these shall
reach the Divine experience and live a life enjoying a sense
of supreme fulfilment.

1069

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

FREE FROM PRIDE AND DELUSION --- Both these
qualities of pride and delusion indicate a false,
exaggerated estimate, of one-self and of others. Erroneous
estimate of one's own importance is called pride and it
brings about an enormous amount of heavy
responsibilities upon oneself to maintain it. There is no
time thereafter to cultivate oneself, or to seek knowledge,
or to get truly educated. Similarly, error in judgement
regarding things and beings, happenings and situations,
in the world outside, is called DELUSION. It makes us live
in a false world of our own imagination without actually
facing the immediate problems around us, as they really
are.
WITH THE EVIL OF ATTACHMENT CONQUERED --To live in the flesh, seeking our life's fulfilment only in the
joy derived from our contact with the sense-objects in the
world around us, is to live in the outer layer, cheating
ourselves entirely of life's deeper possibilities. Such an
ignorant fool gets extremely attached to the objects of the
world, and once this attachment has grown, all his
attentions in life will be irresistibly turned towards those
objects. Shackled by them, ever dancing to their rhythm of
change and destruction, he comes to lay waste his powers,
without ever realising the nobler purpose of the LifeDivine.
EVER DWELLING IN THE SELF --- Detachment from the
world-of-objects is never possible without attaching
ourselves to something nobler and diviner. The human
1070

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mind-intellect-equipment can exist only in the positive
contemplation of some object. It cannot remain in a void
of not contemplating anything. For example, from
tomorrow onwards, let us determine NOT to think of a
bald-headed man, let us say, as soon as we wake up; it is
absolutely certain that the following morning, the very
first thing which we will remember will be a bald-head.
But supposing we give the mind a positive point to
contemplate upon, "Narayana-Narayana," we shall find
that the mind has totally avoided the thought. In the same
way, in order that the mind may not have the evil
attachment in it, it should live in a spirit of contemplation
upon the Self.
THEIR DESIRES COMPLETELY AT REST --- Desire is the
function of the intellect. When the intellect desires, the
mind starts contemplating upon the desired objects; as the
desire, so the thoughts. Therefore, the intellect should be
disciplined not to desire the finite joys arising out of the
ephemeral sense-objects of the world. When the desires
have ended, the mind becomes still.
RELEASED FROM THE PAIRS-OF-OPPOSITES, LIKE
PLEASURE AND PAIN --- When the body comes in
contact with a sense-object, it is the mind that comes to
experience, as it were, the final result of the contact as
pleasure or pain. Once the mind starts recognising this
pair, then it is natural for it to revolt against 'pain' and
instinctively seek 'pleasure.' Unfortunately, in this mad
onrush of seeking pleasure and avoiding pain, there is no
1071

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

stability, for the very things that constituted joys
yesterday, prove to be sources of sorrow today. To cater to
the whims and fancies of such an unsteady entity is to
barter away our chances to bring about any cultural
unfoldment in ourselves.
And the stanza concludes by a positive and optimistic
declaration, having in its force and style, the vehemence of
a commandment, when it says, "THE UNDELUDED
REACH THAT GOAL-ETERNAL." Consciousness
expressed through Matter-vehicles is the miserable man,
torn by his own stresses and strains; and the same
Consciousness, gathered from these vehicles and
experienced as such, is the Divine moment of Infinite
realisation.
THE GOAL IS AGAIN CLEARLY SPECIFIED THUS:
6. Nor does the Sun shine there, nor the moon, nor fire; to which
having gone they return not; that is My Supreme Abode.
Consecutively, in the two previous stanzas, it was
repeatedly asserted that the goal sought in spiritual life is
one, "HAVING ATTAINED WHICH THERE IS NO
RETURN EVER." The very same idea, that Perfection
gained is an irrevocable fact and that there is no more any
fear of return to the natural stupidities of a limited egocentric life, is being emphasised in this stanza also.
Repetition is a method of emphasis in all scriptural
1072

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

literature. No doubt, this method is not used everywhere.
Wherever logic is available, ideas are nailed in by logical
reasonings. but there are realms, into which the teacher
alone has admission in the beginning and not the studentclass, and therefore, the Rishis had no other go but to
repeatedly assert for our acceptance, the nature and
condition of the unknown experience of the Infinite.
This glorious State-of-Perfection is the Goal which almost
all stanzas in the Geeta consistently indicate and though it
is an Absolute State, here an honest attempt is being made
to describe It in terms of finite phenomena.
NEITHER SUN, NOR MOON, NOR FIRE ILLUMINES
THAT --- Herein are enumerated almost all the sources-oflight, blessed by which the physical eyes experience
vision. To see a thing is to know it; and in order that the
organ-of-vision might use its power of seeing, it is not
only sufficient that objects are in front of the sense-organ,
but they must also be bathed in light. In the medium of
light alone can the eyes see forms and colours. Again, not
only do the eyes perceive; but the ears pick up sounds, the
nose the smell, the tongue the tastes, and the skin the
touch. Each instrument perceives its objects. Even this is
not all. We can perceive our feelings and also our ideas.
The 'light' in which we thus perceive all our sense-objects,
all our emotions, and all our thoughts, is the Light of
Consciousness by which alone we become AWARE of all
our experiences.
1073

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This Light of Consciousness cannot be illumined by the
gross sources of light available in the world outside, such
as the Sun, the Moon or the Fire. In fact the very
light of the Sun, or the Moon, or the Fire is an 'object' of
our Consciousness; we are constantly conscious of it. An
OBJECT of perception cannot illumine the SUBJECT that
perceives it --- the SUBJECT and the OBJECT cannot be at
any time one and the same. The AWARENESS by which
we come to experience all our life's joys and sorrows is the
Eternal Self, and to realise that Consciousness is indicated
as the Supreme Goal by the Geeta.
THAT IS MY SUPREME ABODE --- This State of
Conscious-ness into which we can rise on transcending
the agitations of the mind and intellect is described here as
the Abode of the Divine, the Dwelling Place Supreme,
wherein we can confidently make an appointment with
Truth and "meet" the Infinite!
Utilitarians as we are, certainly all seekers will doubt
whether the experience of Truth is worth having at such a
tremendous effort. Is there not a risk of our falling back
into our present confusions and getting deluded by a
finite pain-ridden world of plurality? This fear is allayed
and the seekers are assured, for the third time
continuously in this stanza, when Krishna qualifies, "MY
SUPREME ABODE" as one "TO WHICH HAVING GONE
NONE RETURNS."
1074

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is an experienced fact that when one has mastered a
knowledge, it is almost impossible for one to make any
more mistakes in it; to a great musician, to sing
deliberately out of tune, in disharmonious notes, is as
difficult as it is for a beginner to sing correctly. Having
known a language, to talk ungrammatically is as difficult
as it is for the illiterate to talk correctly. If, in the imperfect
world of imperfect knowledge, a cultured man, educated
and artistic, cannot easily fall back to the levels of the
uncivilised and the illiterate, how much more must it be
an impossible act for the Perfect to come back and fall into
the earlier confusions which are created by 'ignorance'!
This is one of the rarest stanzas in the religious literature
of the world which, in so simple a style, has indicated, so
exhaustively, the Unconditioned-Pure-Self, the InfiniteReality. In Hinduism, it has always been emphasised that
there is a continuity of existence after death and an
individual continues his biography in a new embodiment
under a new set of environments. The individuality, thus
undergoing experiences of birth and death repeatedly, is
called the Jiva, or the embodied-self. This Jiva is the Eternal
Light of Consciousness, playing upon, and SEEMINGLY
conditioned by, the subtle-body, constituted of the mindintellect equipment.
In short, death is only a phenomenon, wherein a given
subtle-body changes its physical-equipment, seeking
'fresh fields and pastures new' for its expression and
expansion. This process is not the reaching of the Infinite;
1075

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

for, 'MY ABODE' IS THAT 'WHEREIN HAVING GONE
THERE IS NO RETURN.'
TO CLEAR THIS POSSIBLE DOUBT THE STRUCTURE
AND THE NATURE OF THE EGO ( JIVA) IS
EXPLAINED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
7. An eternal portion of Myself, having become a living soul in
the world of life, and abiding in PRAKRITI, draws (to itself) the
(five) senses, with mind for the sixth.
A RAY OF MYSELF --- The Infinite has no parts. It can
suffer no divisions within Itself, and yet, just as with
reference to the four walls of my room I consider the
'room-space' as different from the 'outer-space,' so too,
with reference to a given mind-intellect vehicle, the
Infinite Light of Consciousness playing upon it is
considered, by the ignorant, as limited by its vehicles. The
moon-in-the-bucket, will dance and break up into bits
when the water in the bucket trembles at the touch of a
passing breeze. Even if a million such reflected moons
were to be broken and shattered, the immortal moon in
the heavens will not suffer any destruction. Similarly, the
ego-centric personality (Jiva), born out of the
Consciousness playing upon a given subtle-body, suffers
not any sense of limitations. Even though the ego changes
with its joys and sorrows, with its knowledge and
ignorance, with its peace and agitations, the essential
nature of the Infinite Consciousness that sparkles in our
1076

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

heart is Eternal indeed, and hence the stanza qualifies the
Self-in-man as: 'THE ETERNAL JIVA IN THE WORLD OF
JIVAS.'
ATTRACTS THE SENSES --- This Spark of Consciousness
vibrates the entire body with life, renders existence
possible for a living creature, and maintains, by its mere
presence, the sense-faculties and the mental-capacities
around Itself. No doubt these are faculties that belong to
matter, but at the same time, these powers of seeing,
hearing, etc. and also of feeling, thinking, etc., are not the
powers of the sense-organs, or even of the inner organs
(Antah-karana). They are the expressions of the Spirit when
It functions through matter, and hence, it is said that along
with the mind and the five senses, 'ABIDING IN THE
PRAKRITI,' (Chapter XIII) It functions. That this
conditioned-Self is experienced as the limited ego, the
mortal, because of our ignorance or error of judgement
that It is only a portion, as it were, an imaginary portion of
the indivisible whole, etc., --- have all been proved in the
Geeta.
WHEN DOES THE INFINITE DRAW THESE FACULTIES
AROUND IT?
8. When the Lord obtains a body, and when He leaves it, He
takes these and goes (with them) as the wind takes the scents
from their seats (the flowers) .
1077

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When the Lord acquires a body, meaning, when the
Infinite deludes Itself that It is conditioned by the mindintellect, It becomes the Jiva; and the Jiva takes to itself
various bodies from time to time and incarnates in
different environments, which are ordered by its own
burning desires and aspirations, and which are most
suited for exhausting and fulfilling all its demands. From
the moment the Jiva enters a body till it leaves it, it keeps
these sense faculties and mental impressions at all times
with itself. In fact, the 'subtle-body' includes all these
faculties.
At death, the 'subtle-body' permanently departs from the
'gross-body' which is left inert. The dead-body, though
found to maintain the shape of the very individual, has no
more any sense faculty or mental ability or intellectual
capacity, that it had expressed before. These expressions,
physical, mental and intellectual, were those which gave
the body an individual personality-stature. All these
constitute the "subtle-body", and the "gross-body," bereft
of its subtle essence, is called the dead-body.
At the time of death, the 'subtle-body,' as it is described
here, moves off gathering unto itself all faculties, "EVEN
AS THE WIND TAKES SCENTS FROM THEIR RESTING
PLACES", a passing breeze is not at any time separate
from atmospheric air that is everywhere, and yet, when
the breeze passes over a flower, or some sandal-paste, or a
scent-bottle --- which are all seats of fragrance --- it carries
with it the respective aroma. Similarly, the subtle-body,
1078

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

when it moves out, carries along with it the senses, mind
and intellect, not in any gross-form, but as a mere
"fragrance" of what all they had lived through, felt in, and
thought of. Thus viewed, the mind is nothing but a bundle
of vasanas. These vasanas can exist only in the Infinite
Consciousness, and the Light of Awareness illumining the
vasanas is called the 'individual personality' --- Jiva.
In this stanza the Jiva is called the Lord (Ishwara) only
because the 'individual personality' is the Lord of the
body, that orders, commands, and regulates all its actions,
feelings and thoughts. Just as an officer, on receiving his
transfer orders from the Government, packs up his
belongings and moves out of his residence for the time
being, and having reached the new seat of appointment
unpacks and spreads out his furniture for his comforts, so
too, at the time of departing from the body, the subtlebody gathers itself from the gross 'dwelling place,' and on
reaching the new physical structure, it spreads itself out
again to use its faculties through that new "house-ofexperience." These stanzas are really a summary of the
Upanishadic declarations.
THIS SUBTLE-BODY, DESCRIBED IN THE PREVIOUS
STANZAS ROUGHLY AS "THE FIVE SENSES AND THE
MIND AS THE SIXTH," IS BEING EXPLAINED
FURTHER IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:

1079

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

9. Presiding over the ear, the eye, the touch, the taste and the
smell, so also the mind, He enjoys the sense-objects.
The Jiva through the equipment of the mind, enjoys the
world-of-objects available in the new environment,
through the sense-organs of hearing, seeing, touching,
tasting, and smelling, which are expressed through their
respective organs of the ear, the eye, the skin, the tongue,
and the nose.
The pure Light of Consciousness never illumines any
object, because in the Pure Light of the Infinite, there are
no objects at all to illumine. It is only the Light of
Consciousness reflected in the mind-intellect that becomes
the special beam of light, the intelligence, in which alone
the sense-objects become illumined. That is why, very
often, when we are thinking intensively on some problem,
even if some of our friends come in front of us and talk to
us, we neither see, nor hear them. The image of the object
has already fallen on the retina of the eye, and the sound
of the speaker has made the necessary vibrations on the
tympanum of the ears, and yet, we see or hear nothing,
because the conscious mind is turned elsewhere.
Therefore, using the mind along with each sense
separately, the individualised ego (Jiva) the dweller-in-thebody-enjoys the sense-objects such as sound, form, touch,
etc.
IF THE CONSCIOUSNESS WHICH IS ETERNAL AND
PERFECT IS SO INTIMATELY PRESENT IN EVERY
1080

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

EXPERIENCE OF MAN, HOW IS IT THAT WE, WHO
ARE LIVING THROUGH VIVID AND REAL
EXPERIENCES AT EVERY MOMENT OF OUR
EXISTENCE, FAIL TO RECOGNISE THIS DIVINE
PERFECTION, WHICH IS SO CONSTANTLY WITH US
AT ALL TIMES AND EVERYWHERE? THE SELF IS
VISIBLE ONLY TO THE EYE-OF-KNOWLEDGE.
10. Him, who departs, stays and enjoys, who is united with
GUNAS, the deluded do not see; but they do behold Him, who
posses the "eye-of-Knowledge. "
It is true everywhere that a common man, though
observing an object does not fully and correctly
understand it. The better understanding of things is
always reserved for the man of knowledge.
Everybody can read a great piece of literature, but a man
of letters alone can come to comprehend and enjoy fully
the vision expressed in and through the artistic design of
the piece.
Only a jeweller can really estimate the quality and worth
of a jewel, even though all can look at it.
Everyone can hear music, but only a musician can judge
and experience the subtle beauties in a masterly recital.

1081

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Similarly, every one of us, so long as life resides in us, can
perceive, feel and think, and yet, it is only the "wise" man
who can come to recognise and live the Infinite Essence of
Life Itself.
The Infinite Self is at all times present and never is there a
time when It is not. When LEAVING the body, the subtlebody is vitalised by the presence of the Spirit. While the
body is EXISTING, the Self is illuminating all experiences.
While ENJOYING the pleasures of life, it is the Light of
Consciousness that illumines for us all our mental
experiences and our intellectual judgements. At moments,
our entire mental climate changes from peaceful calmness
(Sattwa) to riotous agitations (Rajas), or sinks into a dull
inertia (Tamas), and all these moments, whatever be the
nature of the climate within, are experienced only by the
Light of Consciousness. And yet the unintelligent one
perceives not this Conscious Knowledge that is constantly
making him aware of his moment-to-moment experiences.
An average man is so much preoccupied with the details
of experiences that, he, clinging to his desires for enjoying
the outer beauty of things and situations, comes to
overlook and fails to recognise the steady Light of
Consciousness in him, in the presence of which alone can
any experience be ever possible. Those who have got the
necessary detachment from the minor details of the outer
field-of-experience alone come to recognise and live the
joys of the Pure Self --- the Subject.
1082

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This special vision available to the man-of-Perfection is
called the 'EYE-OF-WISDOM' in the stanza. This is not
any special inner organ as such; it only represents an extra
faculty that develops in the spiritual seeker, with which he
comes to perceive the deeper significances and subtler
suggestions in the superficially chaotic play of plurality.
Those who do not have this intuitive perception
necessarily fail to have this vision of the play of the
Immortal Divine in and through the day-to-day activities
and happenings. The same idea is more artistically
stressed by Sri Shankara elsewhere. This 'EYE-OFKNOWLEDGE' cannot be developed unless the
disciplines of Self-perfection are properly practised. The
subjective technique of self-integration (Yoga) can be
successfully brought about only when complete
integration of personality at the outer levels has taken
place.
A FEW ONLY ULTIMATELY COME TO EXPERIENCE
THIS SELF, WHILE OTHERS, EVEN THOUGH
STRIVING, FAIL TO HAVE THIS REALISATION. WHY?
11. The seekers striving (for Perfection) behold Him dwelling in
the Self; but, the unrefined and unitelligent, even though
striving, see Him not.
Those who are successful in their attempts at stilling their
mind and cleaning their intellect of its disturbing
attachments and desires, come to recognise the glory of
1083

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Self and experience Its Infinite Beatitude. But it is also
true that all those who mechanically put in plenty of selfeffort (Yoga) do not necessarily succeed. Hundreds are
those who complain that though they were regular in their
spiritual programme for years, no appreciable amount of
self-development has come to them. One may wonder
why this should be so.
This moot point is being answered here very logically.
"THOUGH STRIVING, THOSE OF UNREFINED MIND
AND DEVOID OF WISDOM, PERCEIVE HIM NOT." Two
conditions are unavoidable if meditation is to ultimately
yield its promised result: (a) The purification of the mind
is generally defined as removal of agitations (Vikshepa)
created by one's false ego-centric attachment to senseobjects; (b) Also, the intellect is to be tuned up properly to
a correct understanding of the nature of the Self, and thus
all doubts of the misty mind (Avarana) that veil its right
perception are also to be removed through study,
reflection and practice. If these two adjustments are not
properly accomplished, through practice of devotion
(Bhakti-Yoga) and service (Karma-Yoga), all attempts at
meditation in the "Path-of-Knowledge" can only end in
failure.
In short, the stanza emphasises that those whose minds
have not been properly regenerated through practice of
self-control of the senses, and who have not renounced
and abandoned their evil ways of looking at things from
limited ego-centric standpoint, whose pride has not yet
1084

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

been subdued --- such seekers, however sincerely and
ardently they may meditate, have little or no chance of
unfolding themselves into their diviner possibilities;
THEY BEHOLD HIM NOT. Though the Self is the nearest,
and therefore, most easily perceivable, yet, all do not see
Him, because of their complete slavery to the
enchantments of the sense-objects.
So far the Self has been indicated as: (1) That, which
cannot be illumined by the known phenomenal sources of
light, such as the Sun, the Moon and the Fire; (2) That
having reached which, none returns from that State of
Perfection; (3) That, of which the individual entities (Jivas)
are as though only a part.
Hereafter, in the following four stanzas the Immanence of
the Lord --- (a) as the All-illumining Light of
Consciousness, (b) as the All-sustaining Life, (c) as the
subjective warmth of Life, in all living organisms, and (d)
as the Self in all the hearts --- is being described.
TO SHOW THIS VERY GOAL AS THE ESSENCE OF ALL
AND
THE
REALITY
BEHIND
ALL
THESE
EXPERIENCES, KRISHNA PROCEEDS TO GIVE A
SHORT SUMMARY OF THE LORD'S IMMANENCE, IN
THE FOLLOWING FOUR VERSES:

1085

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

12. That Light which is residing in the Sun and which illumines
the whole world, and that which is in the moon and in the fire -- know that Light to be Mine.
We, who are familiar with the modern scientific
observations must necessarily get rattled a bit when we
read the meaning of the stanza. But without losing our
balance, if we were to quietly ruminate over the statement,
we shall realise that our confusions are only because of the
limitation of our own intellect --- which we have
cultivated by the study of intellectually limited sciences.
In the early classrooms we are told, very scientifically, that
the earth is a portion of the Sun that has got detached
from it and got held within the web of mutual attraction
of the planets, and which has now cooled to its present
temperature. But if we ask the question where the Sun
itself came from, the teacher of science is not only
uncomfortable, but also positively tickled to a justifiable
bad temper! Science can move only in a field where it can
gather the necessary data to calculate and to prove.
But philosophy seeks to satisfy the questionings of the
human intellect regarding the Ultimate Source of all
things, even if the necessary scientific data for such an
attempt may not be available in the laboratory. There is a
definite frontier at which the intellect and its observations,
its logic and conclusions, its reasoning and assertions,
must necessarily exhaust themselves and cry halt. And
yet, the question is not fully answered, for we find an
honest intellect still left wondering: Why! How!! What!!!
1086

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

There science is silent. Where science has fulfilled itself,
and from where onwards its light fails to illumine the
path, there philosophy starts its pilgrimage towards the
Absolute Satisfaction.
Here, the stanza says that the very light which emerges
from the Sun and which illumines the whole world, is the
Light that is emerging from Me, the Infinite
Consciousness. Nay, the light that comes from the moon,
the light that emanates from the fire, are all expressions of
the Infinite Reality, when It expresses through the moon
and the fire.
The manifestations are different because the equipments
are different: the LIGHT in the bulb, the HEAT in the
furnace, the MOVEMENT in the fan, are all indeed
different manifestations, because the bulb, the furnace,
and the fan are dissimilar equipments; but the energy
called electricity is one and the same. In brief,
Consciousness expressed through the Sun manifests
sunlight, expressed through the moon is the moon-light,
and expressed through the dry fuel is the fire --- and yet,
all of them are, in reality, nothing but the Infinite Itself, in
Its varied glorious manifestations. The Infinite manifests
Itself in order to create the conducive environment, in
which alone the world can exist, and wherein, as the Lord,
He can come to express Himself and play His game of
plurality!!
MOREOVER:
1087

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

13. Permeating the earth I support all beings by (My) energy;
and having become the liquid moon, I nourish all herbs.
PERMEATING THE EARTH I SUPPORT ALL BEINGS
WITH MY ENERGY --- Long before artificial manure was
discovered, the earth had, no doubt, a long history; and
some of those eras in the bygone days were, perhaps,
more over-populated than the present. And yet, the earth
continued to sustain life. The capacity of the earth to
sustain life and nourish it, the warmth and the mineral
contents, are all, says the Lord, "MY OWN VITALITY,"
meaning, the same Consciousness which, through the Sun
became the necessary warmth of the atmosphere, while
expressing through the earth, became the 'potential
fertility' of the soil and the 'life-giving secret capacity' of
the earth.
HAVING BECOME THE MOONLIGHT I NOURISH ALL
THE PLANTS --- The same Eternal Consciousness, while
functioning through the moon expresses Itself as moonlight and fills each plant with its "essence" content. If this
passage was rejected by members of a previous
generation, children of the modern scientific knowledge
will not dare to question it. Modern agricultural science
proves that the planetary organisation, especially the
moon, has got some strange connection with the expected
productivity in agriculture! Recent experiments have been
reported where tomato seedlings sown on the full-moon
1088

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

day and plucked again on a full-moon day were found to
yield a better crop.
Indeed it is accepted everywhere that the paddy
preserved for seeds is not only to be dried in the Sun, but
is must also lie exposed to the moon. The naturopaths
keep some of their preparations --- as also the Ayurvedic
physicians --- exposed to the moon for a certain number of
days, and they claim that the medicines gain certain
curative powers thereby.
All these above facts, touched upon lightly here, should
prove that the declaration in the stanza is not totally
unscientific.
The Sun, the moon and the fire are the Cosmic sources of
all energy in the world, and the very Source-of-the-energy,
from where it flows through these phenomenal
expressions, is the Infinite Consciousness. The
Consciousness functions through the earth and gives the
fields their special capacity to sustain and nourish the
vegetable world, and when the flora grows up, it is again
the same Consciousness, functioning through the moon
and manifesting as moonlight that fills each plant and
fruit with its essential food-value (Vitamins).
MOREOVER:

1089

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

14. Having become (the Fire) VAISHVAANARA , I abide in
the body of beings, and associated with PRANA and APANA,
digest the four-fold food.
ABIDING IN THE BODY OF LIVING BEINGS AS
VAISHVAANARA --- The same Supreme Consciousness
expresses Itself as the warmth-of-life in all living
creatures. That physical structure from which all warmth
has gone, is dead. Metabolism creates the body-heat and
the functions of the inner organisms continue
automatically without any conscious effort on the part of
the individual, so long as LIFE is pulsating in the body.
Here, the Eternal Reality is indicated as that mighty LIFE,
which, when pulsating through the body, manifests Itself
as the 'digestive fire' (Vaishvaanara), which assimilates all
the food taken in.
I DIGEST THE FOUR-FOLD FOOD --- The digestive
power in a healthy living organism assimilates all types of
food. The entire variety of human diet is classified under
four heads in Sanskrit as food that should be (i)
masticated, (ii) swallowed, (iii) sucked, and (iv) licked.
Under these four types, we can embrace all kinds of food,
vegetarian and non-vegetarian, prepared and unprepared,
raw and ripe. All things consumed by the mouth are
digested, assimilated and absorbed because of the
digestive system and the power in the digestive system is
nothing but a manifestation of the All-present Life
Principle.
1090

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ASSOCIATED WITH PRANA AND APANA --- The two
physiological functions of "perception" and of "excretion"
in all living creatures are called Prana and Apana. Here,
however, these terms can be considered in their broadest
general sense. Not only does the Consciousness, as the
'digestive fire,' assimilate the food that has reached the
stomach, but is again Life manifested as the peristaltic
movement (Prana) that receives and rolls down the food
swallowed, through the oesophagus into the stomach.
After digesting, assimilating and absorbing food, it is
again the same Divine Spark-of-Life that gives the
intestines its capacity to throw out (Apana) the undigested
and unnecessary by-products. In short, it is the Lord that
helps us to swallow the food, it is the Lord that assimilates
the food, and it is the Lord again that presides over the
function of eliminating the by-products.
MOREOVER:
15. And I am seated in the hearts of all, from Me are memory,
knowledge, as well as their absence. I am verily that which has
to be known in all the VEDAS; I am indeed the author of
VEDANTA, and, the "knower of the VEDAS" am I.
I AM SEATED IN THE HEARTS OF ALL --- If there be
thus an Infinite Omnipotent Power that manifests Itself as
the different things and beings in the world, how can a
seeker make his pilgrimage towards It and meet this Great
Divine? Lord Krishna says that He lives in the Hearts of
1091

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

all living creatures. Here the HEART does not mean the
physiological "heart" but it is the metaphysical HEART.
The term HEART, in philosophy, means "mind which has
been trained to entertain constantly the positive qualities
of love, tolerance, mercy, charity, kindness, and like." A
peaceful, joyous mind, settled in tranquillity, alert and
vigilant to receive higher intimations, is called the "heart."
The Infinite 'DWELLS IN THE HEART'means, though He
is present everywhere the Lord is most conspicuously selfevident, during meditation, in the HEART of the
meditator.
FROM ME ARE MEMORY KNOWLEDGE, AS WELL AS
THEIR ABSENCE --- The Consciousness Divine has been
declared above as revelling in the heart of every living
creature. This Light-of-Life seems to have no particular
justification to exit since all perceptions are through the
body, all feelings are through the mind, all thoughts are
through the intellect. The Geeta here declares what exactly
is then the special grace of Consciousness. It is the light of
Consciousness that illumines all our experiences in Life.
From this Supreme alone all memories, knowledge, as
well as forgetfulness, come to us. Memory is constituted of
our experiences of the past, stored away in our
understanding which guide our present and future
activities. All education and knowledge that we have at
this moment are memories from the past. Unless we are
aware of these memories, they will not be available in our
present life. Reacting properly to the present sets of
stimuli and thereby gaining fresh and vivid experiences, is
1092

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the process of widening our field of knowledge. And all
these processes are possible only in the Light of Life.
Acquisition of new knowledge presupposes our capacity
to give up our earlier false notions. Imperfect knowledge
gets weeded out when a person is cultivating new
knowledge. A capacity to forget is an essential prerequisite in acquiring fresh knowledge. This stanza
explains that all these subjective activities, mental and
intellectual, arise from and are maintained by the
Conscious Principle, the Lord-Himself.
IT IS I THAT IS TO BE KNOWN BY ALL THE VEDAS --In all the scriptures of the world, including the various
portions of all the Vedas in India, Krishna says, this Infinite
Consciousness is the one common factor that has been
extolled and adored. To realise this is to reach the goal-oflife, the fulfilment of existence. The Consciousness that
revels in the hearts of all living creatures is the non-dual
Immortal Reality, the All-pervading and It is the only
substratum for the pluralistic world of experiences.
I AM INDEED THE AUTHOR OF VEDANTA, AS WELL
AS THE KNOWER OF THE VEDAS --- Since
Consciousness alone is the Eternal Reality, and everything
else is a projection upon it, the very essence in everything,
as expressed in the Vedas also, is this Consciousness. The
seeker who listens to the Vedas reflects upon their wisdom,
and ultimately comes to experience the fulfilment of his
1093

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

life, is also at no stage anything other than the same
Consciousness.
In short, it has been said that the Consciousness is the
Light in the Sun; it is the same Consciousness that
fertilises the earth; the Consciousness as moonlight
supplies food-value to the plant-kingdom; it is Truth
Itself, as the body-warmth that presides over the
assimilation of the food within the body, and supervises
the process of life's transactions with the world outside;
and it is the same Light of Consciousness that makes it
possible for us to gain experience, to store away
knowledge, and to replace ignorance with better
knowledge.
The Eternal Principle which thus expresses Itself as the
phenomenal powers --- which, with their activities make it
possible for life to exist on the surface of the earth, and
which helps the higher life to grow and expand into
wisdom --- is the very theme indicated in the Vedas as the
Eternal Reality, and to know it and to bring It under our
experience is to know the Infinite.
Till now the earlier verses have enumerated the glories of
Narayana, the Blessed Lord, as manifested through the
various vehicles such as the Sun, the moon, the earth, the
body, the mind and the intellect. Now, in the following
verses, Lord Krishna points out the True Nature of the
Infinite as the unconditioned (Niru-padhika), All pervading
(Sarva gatah) and Eternal (Nityah). This Infinite Reality
1094

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

transcends all intellectual concepts, such as the finite and
the infinite --- as the perishable and the imperishable.
CONSIDERING
THE
RELATIVE
EXPERIENCE, BHAGAWAN SAYS:

WORLD

OF

16. Two 'PURUSHAS' are there in this world, the Perishable
and the Imperishable. All beings are the Perishable and the
'KOOTASTHAH' is called the Imperishable.
Earlier, in Chapter XIII, we had an exhaustive discussion
of the field-of-Matter and the Knower-of-the field. The
discussion we had so far in this chapter must prove that
the Sun, the warmth in the atmosphere, the earth, its
potentialities, the plant-kingdom, and man and his
capacities --- all of them together constituting the field-ofMatter, are nothing other than the Supreme Itself.
When the Infinite Consciousness becomes the light and
heat of the Sun, the fertility of the earth, the essence in the
plant, the Consciousness in the heart, the faculties of
knowing and remembering, etc., they are all different
forms of Consciousness alone. Thus, the fact that the fieldof-Matter is nothing other than the Spirit Itself was
already demonstrated. The only difference is that the
Spirit, when It has assumed the form of Matter, looks as
though It is subject to change and destruction. Thus the
"realm of Matter" is indicated in this stanza as the
Perishable (Kshara) Purusha.
1095

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In the relative field of experience, when we talk with
reference to the inert and perishable world of Matter, the
Spirit is indicated as the Conscious Principle, which is
Imperishable. With reference to one's wife alone is one
called a husband; when I have a son I will become a
father. Similarly, with reference to the perishable and the
changing Matter-envelopments, the Consciousness is
indicated as the Imperishable and the Changeless. The
body changes; from childhood to youth, from youth to old
age; the mind changes in its quality of feelings and
emotions; the intellect expressing differently with each
added knowledge and experience is ever in a state of
change. But one is constantly AWARE OF all these
changes. This Consciousness which has been constantly
recognising and illumining all changes, at all levels, all
through the individual's life, is necessarily changeless.
This Conscious Principle is called Akshara only with
reference to and as a contrast with the Perishable, the
(Kshara).
This Immutable and Imperishable principle of Life is the
Self, common in all living creatures at all times. That this
Self, in the midst of change remains changeless and that
all changes can take place only in contact with it are both
indicated by the metaphor suggested by the term used
here, Kootashah.
DISTINCT FROM THESE TWO --- THE PERISHABLE
AND THE IMPERISHABLE --- UNTAINTED BY THE
1096

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

IMPERFECTIONS OF THESE TWO
CONDITIONS, IS THE HIGHEST SPIRIT:

RELATIVE

17. But distinct is the Supreme PURUSHA called the Highest
Self, the Indestructible Lord, who, pervading the three worlds
(waking, dream and deep-sleep) , sustains them.
But distinct from all these is the Highest Spirit spoken of
as the Supreme Self. With reference to my own children
alone am I really a father. With reference to my duty or
status I may have yet another name. Similarly, the
Imperishable is a status and a dignity gained by the Spirit
only with reference to the field-of-the-perishables around
and about It, through which It manifests as the various
expressions of Life. When my children have died, or I am
dismissed from my job, I am no more a father, nor can I
any more claim my erstwhile official dignity. But that
does not mean that I am, in the absence of children or
work, an absolute zero, a total non-entity! No. I will exist
as "the son of my father," or in my individual capacity,
though devoid of all my special status and dignity born
out of my relationship with my profession, or with my
children.
When the perishable (Kshara) is transcended, what
remains is not Imperishable (Akshara) but that which
played as the 'Perishable-Purusha' as well as the
'Imperishable-Purusha.' This Pure Spirit (Purusha) is
spoken of as the Supreme Self, who 'PERVADES AND
1097

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SUSTAINS THE THREE WORLDS': "World" in Sanskrit
means 'realm of experience.' The three realms of
experiences in which we eke out our life's returns are the
states of waking, dream, and deep-sleep. The same Self is
the illuminator of the experiences in all the above three
states-of-Consciousness.
There are not three different types of Purushas; according
to the limitations and conditions around It, the Spirit,
appears different in Its manifestations. A pot is in a room;
now the 'pot-space' is a lesser part of the 'room-space,' and
the room-space is only a negligible portion of the 'totalspace.' At the same time 'pot-space' minus the pot, if
understood as "space," is the same space as the infinitespace. Now, in the above example, pot-space and roomspace are something other than the outer-space, in as
much as, conditioned as they are, they have gathered unto
themselves certain limitations, but the unconditioned 'potspace' and the 'room-space' are nothing but the infinitespace; break the pot, pull down the walls, the space that
was the 'pot-space' and the space that was the 'roomspace' have both become one with the Infinite-space!
The Infinite Consciousness is Itself the perishable-field in
another form, and as the Knower-of-the-Field, the same
Consciousness is the Imperishable Reality in the
perishable conditionings, But when these conditionings
are transcended, the same Self is experienced as the
Supreme Self --- Paramatman.
1098

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SHOWING THE ETYMOLOGY OF THE VERY TERM,
PURUSHOTTAMA, THE LORD SHOWS HOW HE IS
REALLY THE SUPREME:
18. As I transcend the perishable and I am even Higher than the
Imperishable, I am declared as the PURUSHOTTAMA (the
Highest -PURUSHA) in the world and in the VEDAS.
Explaining the very word Purushottama, Lord Krishna says
that Pure Consciousness is HIGHER than both the
'Perishable 'and the 'Imperishable.' The Perishable can
continue its processes of change only against the
Imperishable Truth. It is a scientific fact that no change is
perceptible without reference to a changeless factor. If two
trains are both moving at the same speed no movement is
recognised by perceivers in both the trains. If the changes
in the world of Matter --- the body, the mind and the
intellect are recognised, then there must be a steady
principle that illumines all these different changes. This
constant factor among the Perishing is called the
Imperishable.
This illumining factor gathers its status as the
"Imperishable" only with reference to the "Perishable"
realms. Once the perishable realms are transcended, the
Imperishable amidst them Itself comes to shine forth as
the Pure Infinite, which is the Purushottama. Since the
Truth, Purushottama, is experienced only on transcending
both the 'Perishable' and the 'Imperishable,' It is known by
the term the 'Highest-Spirit' --- Purushottama. This term is
1099

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

used to indicate the Supreme-most Self, both by the
ancient sacred volumes (Vedas), and by the poets and
writers of the world.
NOW THE LORD SPEAKS OF THE FRUITS GAINED BY
ONE WHO REALISES THE SUPREME TRUTH AS
DESCRIBED ABOVE:
19. He who undeluded, thus knows Me, the Supreme
PURUSHA , he, all-knowing, worships Me with his whole
being, O Bharata.
'Undeluded' means, one who has totally detached oneself
from one's wrong identifications with body, mind, and
intellect, and therefore, also from the world of
perceptions, feelings, and thoughts, which these vehicles
provide.
THUS KNOWS ME --- To 'know' here is not a mere
intellectual comprehension, but a deep subjective spiritual
apprehension. That the undeluded one thus experiences in
himself that he is the Purushottama-principle Itself, seems
to be the suggestion here.
Such a man who has fully identified himself with the
Infinite "Me" alone is a true devotee, who 'WORSHIPS ME
WITH ALL HIS BEING'; such a one is the greatest of
devotees, declares the Geetaacharya. Identification with the
beloved is everywhere the measure of love; the greater the
love, the greater is our identification with the object of our
1100

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

love. Therefore, arithmetically, total identification should
be the maximum Love or devotion.
The Highest Spirit, Purushottama, being the Infinite
Consciousness, it is the 'All-knower', inasmuch as
whenever anything is known through perception, feeling,
or thought, it is the Principle of Consciousness that
illumines it. One who has transcended one's matterequipments and has successfully sought and discovered
one's spiritual nature as the Infinite Consciousness, that
individual, as the Supreme Awareness, is indicated here
as the "All-knower" (Sarvavit).
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUE NATURE OF THE
LORD IS THE THEME OF THIS CHAPTER AND THE
FOLLOWING
CONCLUDING
VERSE
KRISHNA
EXTOLS THIS THEME, WHICH GIVES LIBERATION TO
MAN FROM ALL HIS FLESH-BORN SORROWS, MINDBORN
AGITATIONS
AND
INTELLECT-BORN
RESTLESS-NESS:
20. Thus, this most secret science (teaching) , has been taught by
Me, O sinless one. On knowing this (a man) becomes 'wise' ,
and all his duties are accomplished, O Bharata.
In this concluding verse Krishna says that He has taught
in this chapter 'THE MOST SECRET SCIENCE.' The
spiritual science (Brahma-vidya) is termed as 'secret,' not in
the sense that it should not be given out to anybody, but
that it is a knowledge which cannot, of its own accord
1101

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

come to anyone, unless one is initiated into it by a
'Knower of Reality.'
O SINLESS ONE --- 'Sin'means an act, a feeling or a
thought, which having been perpetrated, entertained, or
thought of, comes back after a time to agitate our bosom
with its insulting taunts and helpless regrets. In short, SIN
is the resultant of the past that comes to demean our selfestimate and creates in us a lot of mental storm and
consequent dissipation. One who has thus an inner
personality which carries disturbing memories of
undignified acts and cruel schemes, has indeed, a bosom
that is ever agitated and restless. Such a mind-intellectequipment cannot consistently apply itself to any serious
and deep investigation into the subtle realm of the Pure
Awareness that lies beyond the frontiers of the intellect.
Therefore, the term 'sinless' in the context here only means
"O STEADY-MINDED, ALERT AND VIGILANT
STUDENT."
He who has realised this PURUSHOTTAMA-STATE of
Consciousness becomes 'wise,' for he cannot thereafter
make any error of judgement in life and thereby create
confusions and sorrows for himself and for others around
him.
The second of the benefits accrued by entering the
Purushottama State is the enjoyment of a complete sense of
fulfilment (Krita-krityataa) --- a total and overwhelming joy
that comes to a man when he realises that he has fully
1102

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

accomplished what is expected of him. This is promised
here in this verse as the reward for the realisation of the
Purushottama-stage.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the fifteenth
discourse ends entitled:
THE YOGA OF THE SUPREME SPIRIT

Om Om Om Om Om

1103

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 16
Daivasura Sampad Vibhaga Yoga
The Yopga of Divine and Devilish Estates
The Blessed Lord said: 1. Fearlessness, purity of heart,
steadfastness in the YOGA -of-Knowledge, alms-giving, control
of the senses, sacrifice, study of the SHASTRAS, and
straightforwardness . . .
As we read the opening stanza we are reminded on the
twenty VALUES of life, that were described earlier by
Lord Krishna in His Divine discourse (XIII --- 8 to 12).
Herein we find an almost exhaustive list of the noble
TRAITS in a cultured man living the spiritual way-of-life;
a life wherein he accepts and lives those twenty VALUES
of life, while meeting the work-a-day world. And in the
enumeration of these qualities, FEARLESSNESS
(Abhayam) comes first. Fear is generated in one, only when
one is in a field which is clouded by 'ignorance.' Fear is the
expression of Avidya. Where there is 'Knowledge' there is
fearlessness. By placing this quality of fearlessness at the
head of the list, with the unsung music of sheer
suggestiveness, the divine Acharya is indicating that true
ethical perfection in one is directly proportional to the
spiritual evolution attained by the individual.

1104

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PURITY OF HEART --- No amount of external discipline
can supply the student the positive dynamism that is the
very core in all moral living. The Geeta preaches a
dynamic religion, militant both in theory and practice. The
Divine Charioteer is not satisfied by a tame generation of
passive goodness. He wants the members of the perfect
Hindu society not only to live among themselves the
highest values of life, but also to burst forth with the
positive glow of righteousness and bathe the entire
generation of men in the light of truth and virtue --- virtue
that implies honesty of intentions and purity of motives.
STEADFASTNESS IN THE YOGA-OF-KNOWLEDGE --This ethical purity at the level of the heart cannot be
brought about when the human mind is turned outward
to the flesh. Only when the mind is constantly in unison
with the Infinite Song of the Soul, can it discover in itself
the necessary courage to renounce its low appetites,
clinging attachments and the consequent foul motives
GURGLING from within itself. Devotion of Knowledge
(Jnana-Yoga) is thus the positive way to persuade the mind
to leave all its low temptations. When a child is playing
with a delicate glass curio, to save the precious object, the
parents generally offer it a piece of chocolate, and the little
child, anxious to get at the chocolate, drops the precious
thing down. Similarly, a mind that is awakened to the
serener joys of the Self will, naturally, never hang on to
sensuous objects and their fleeting joys.

1105

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ALMS-GIVING (CHARITY), CONTROL OF THE SENSES
AND SACRIFICE --- These three are now the techniques
by which an individual successfully tunes up his inner
instruments of knowledge in order to discover the
required amount of "steady devotion to Knowledge."
Charity must come from one's sense of abundance.
Charity springs only from a sense of oneness in us --oneness between the giver and the recipient. Unless one is
able to identify oneself with others, one will not feel this
noble urge to share all that one has with others who do
not have it. Thus Daana is born out of a capacity to restrain
one's instincts of acquisition and aggrandisement, and to
replace them with the spirit of sacrifice, and it consists in
sharing with others the objects of the world that one
possesses.
If charity (daana) develops in one the capacity to detach
oneself from the wealth that one possesses and share it
with others who are poorer, then we can say that control
of the sense-organs (dama) is the application of the same
spirit of sacrifice in one's personal life. To give a complete
licence for indulgence to the sense-organs is to waste,
unproductively, the total human vitality. To economise in
the expenditure of energy through the sense organs in the
fields of sense-objects is to discover an extra amount of
untapped energy. This energy can be made use of as the
motive power behind the mind and intellect that is set on
a flight to the higher realms of meditation. To keep the
mind turned up to the Self, a subtle energy is called forth,
and it will be discovered within ourselves when we
1106

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

control our sense excesses. Without dama and daana the
pilgrimage to Truth is merely a dream.
In the Vedic period, SACRIFICE (Yajna) was the day-today devotional ritualism that the average man of spiritual
seeking diligently practised. Without this regular prayercum-puja --- which is the substitute for Yajna available for
us --- control of the sense-organs will be impossible, and
without this control, the spirit of charity cannot come. In
the absence of both daana and dama, spiritual experience of
the Self, recognition of the Divine within us, is impossible.
It is interesting to note that each subsequent term in this
list is logically connected with the one indicated
immediately before.
STUDY OF THE SCRIPTURES (Swaadhyaaya) --Traditionally, this term indicates regular study of the
scriptures. Study of scriptural literature daily, in
measured quantities, will provide the necessary
inspiration to live the divine life in our day-to-day
existence. But, scriptural study is indicated here by a very
significant term, which in Sanskrit suggests that the study
of the scriptures should not be merely an intellectual
appreciation, but as the student reads the text-books, he
must be able, simultaneously, to observe, analyse and
realise the truth of what he is studying within his own life.
Regular studies, coupled with regular practice (Yajna),
will give us the courage to live in self-control of the senseorgans, which in its turn will supply us with steadiness in
meditation for realising the Highest.
1107

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ASCETICISM (Tapas) --- All conscious self-denials at the
body level, whereby an individual reduces his
indulgences in the world outside, gains more and more
energy within himself, and applies the new-found energy
for the purpose of self-development, are called Tapas.
UPRIGHTNESS (Arjavam) --- Crookedness in thought,
emotion and general conduct has a self-destructive
influence upon the personality. Actions belying one's own
true intentions and motives, convictions and aspirations,
realisation and discrimination will result in the
crookedness of one's personality. He who is indulging in
this way-of-life will thereby develop in himself a split
personality and will soon lose the glow of efficiency and
be impoverished in the powers of personal grit.
In short, in this very opening stanza of the chapter, while
enumerating the qualities of a "Divinely good" man, we
find a definite scientific connection among them. Ethical
values and moral beauties described in Hinduism are not
arbitrary declarations of an imaginative Saint or a
melancholy prophet. They are built on the rocky
foundations of reason and experience. Sincerely pursued
and consciously lived, they contribute to a better
expression of the diviner possibilities in man which
generally lie dormant. Ethics in India are not, by
themselves, a passport to heaven, but are a preparation for
a fuller unfoldment of the divine contents in the bosom of
man.
1108

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

MOREOVER, HERE ARE LISTED
CONTENTS OF THE GODLY:

THE

MENTAL

2. Harmlessness, truth, absence of anger, renunciation,
peacefulness, absence of crookedness, compassion to beings, noncovetousness, gentleness, modesty, absence of fickle-ness . . .
Continuing, Lord Krishna enumerates the mental contents
of the godly type of men.
HARMLESSNESS (Ahimsa) --- It does not consist so much
in not causing bodily injury to beings in the physical
world, as in not harming any living creature in the world
around from the realm of thought. Physical ahimsa is
simply impossible. To continue living, some kind of
physical harm or the other has to be brought about; it is
unavoidable. But even while bringing about unavoidable
disturbances around ourselves, if our motives are pure
and clean, the harm so wrought is not regarded as causing
injury.
TRUTH (Satyam) --- We have already discussed this virtue
while explaining the last term in the previous stanza
"uprightness."
AN EVEN TEMPER (absence of anger --- Akrodha) --Sometimes it is rendered as 'angerless-ness' which is not
very happy. A better rendering would be the capacity to
check, at the right time, waves of anger as they mount up
1109

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

in our bosom, so that we do not manifest anger in our
actions. It will be almost unnatural to expect the mind to
become incapable of anger. But no emotion should be
allowed to overwhelm us to such a degree as to render us
almost impotent. This anger arises out of an insufferable
impatience with others. In short, Akrodha does not mean
'without anger' but only 'keeping, as far as possible, an
even temper.'
SPIRIT OF RENUNCIATION (Tyaga) --- In this stanza also
we find, as we noticed in the previous stanza, that there is
a sequential order strictly followed in the development of
thought from term to term. If without respect to Truth, we
cannot live in the spirit of ahimsa, so also without the spirit
of renunciation an even temper is but a vain hope.
PEACEFULNESS (Quietude --- Shanti) --- If a seeker is
capable of living, conscious of Truth harming none,
keeping an even temper, in a spirit of renunciation, inspite
of all disturbing environments and happenings around,
then he is the one who shall come to experience peace and
quietude in himself. Even in the midst of a stormy life and
outrageous circumstances, such an individual can
successfully keep his inward balance and intellectual
poise.
ABSENCE OF CROOKEDNESS (Unmalicious tongue --Apaishunam) --- The ugliness or beauty of the tongue is
ordered by the personality behind it. A shattered entity
will seek self-gratification in malicious scandal1110

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mongering, and the soft, fleshy tongue can often become
more devastating than the most destructive missile. A
seeker who is trying to reach a fuller and more exhaustive
self-expression should develop such an inward harmony
that his speech should echo the fragrance of his soul. A
speech with softness of tone, clarity of expression, honesty
of conviction, power of bringing a clear picture in the
listener's mind with no veiled meaning, overflowing with
sincerity, devotion and love, becomes the very quality of
the autobiography of the speaker's personality. To
develop, therefore, a habit of such speech would be
unconsciously training many aspects in ourselves which
are all necessary for the perfect disciplining of the inner
equipments.
COMPASSION (TENDERNESS) TOWARDS BEINGS --In the society in general, it is not reasonable for a seeker to
expect that all will keep up to the ideal that he himself
entertains. There will be imperfections around. But to
recognise, in and through those imperfections, the Infinite
beauty of life expressed, is the secret of enduring
tenderness in all Saints and Sages. Love alone can discover
an infinite amount of tenderness in us. Unless we train
ourselves to see the beauty of life pulsating through even
wretched hearts and ugly characters, we will fail to bring
forth tenderness to sweeten life within and without.
NON-CONVETOUSNESS (Aloluptvam) --- In the
subjective life, to live "without covetousness" means
controlling our sense-organs from extreme indulgence in
1111

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sense-enjoyments. An average man has an endless thirst
and an insatiable
hunger for sense indulgence. To remain in self-control
without endless sense-hunger is meant by the term noncovetousness.
GENTLENESS AND MODESTY --- These are not so much
the particular disciplines of the individual, as the resultant
beauty and harmony which an individual brings forth as
the fragrance of his culture, in his contacts with the world
outside. These two qualities are best seen in one who has
established himself in all the above-mentioned noble
qualities. The conduct of such a disciplined man will be
both gentle and modest.
ABSENCE OF FICKLE-NESS --- NOT UNNECESSARILY
MOVING THE LIMBS (Achaapalam) --- Restlessness of
mind and unsteadiness of character are reflected in the
physical movement of a person. The body shadows the
condition of the mind. A constant restlessness, a sudden
outburst of activity, an immodest shaking of the body and
voluptuous tossings of the limbs are all noticed only in
individuals who have not yet cultivated a steady character
and a purposeful personality. These can be seen in a child
and there they are even considered as enhancing its
beauty. But as an individual grows, the beauty in him is
his mastery over himself as declared by his movements.

1112

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Shankara explains this as "NOT TO SPEAK OR MOVE
HANDS AND LEGS IN VAIN." This is an extension of the
meaning of this term, and implies the promptitude and
economy of all physical energy in any efficient activity.
Unnecessarily exhausting the muscles with indecisive
movements and thoughtless exertions are signs of
weakness in the personality. Such individuals are
extremely imaginative and miserably weak in their
intellectual calibre and emotional vitality. To avoid such
movements, therefore, is to cure many simple weaknesses
at the various facets of any given personality.
MOREOVER, CONTINUING THE LIST OF DIVINE
QUALITIES:
3. Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred,
absence of pride --- these belong to the one born for the Divine
Estate, O Bharata.
VIGOUR --- BRILLIANT GLOW (Tejas) --- This is not a
mere physical glow of complexion produced by good food
and ample rest. Nor is it just an exterior beauty arising out
of careful tending of the physical structure and planned
nourishing of the pads of flesh around the sage. The glow
of spirituality is not literally a painted halo around him,
glimmering as a ring-of-fire. The brilliance of his intellect,
the twinkling joy in his eyes, the thrilling fragrance of
peace around, the serene poise in his activities, the
dalliance of his love for all, the light of joy that ever shines
1113

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

forth from the innermost depths of his being --- these
constitute their resistible attraction of the personality of
the sage, who, with abundant energy, serves all and
discovers for himself a fulfilment in that service.
FORGIVENESS --- PATIENCE (Kshamaa) --- The context in
which the word is used here should increase the depth of
its meaning. It is not merely "a capacity to patiently live
through some minor physical or mental inconvenience,
when insulted or injured by others." It is a subtle boldness
that is shown by a man in facing the world around with
an unruffled serenity even in the face of the most
powerful opposition and provoking situations.
FORTITUDE (Dhriti) --- When an individual daringly
meets life he cannot expect, all the time, happy situations,
favourable circumstances and a conducive arrangement of
chances in his field of activity. Ordinarily, a weak man
suddenly feels dejected and is tempted to leave his field of
work when it is only half done. Many lose their chances of
achieving the Highest, and desert the field of action,
almost at the moment when, perhaps, victory is round the
corner! In order to stick to his guns, man needs a secret
energy to nurture and nourish his exhausted and fatigued
morale, and this sacred energy welling up in his wellintegrated personality is 'FORTITUDE.' Strength of faith,
conviction in the goal, consistency of purpose, vivid
perception of the ideal and a bold spirit of sacrifice
cultivated diligently --- all these form the source from
1114

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

which fortitude trickles down to remove exhaustion,
fatigue, despair and so on.
PURITY (Shoucham) --- The word indicates not only the
inner purity --- purity of thoughts and motives --- but it
also suggests, the purity of environments, cleanliness of
habit and personal belongings. As a result of an overemphasis on subjective purity, today, we find in our
society, an utter neglect of external purity. Clean clothes
and civic-habits have both become rare in our society.
Even the devotee-class is unmindful about these, although
our religion emphasises that purity and cleanliness are
unavoidable disciplines for a seeker.
ABSENCE-OF-HATRED (Adroha) --- Harmlessness
(Ahimsa) was a virtue explained in the previous stanza.
Here the same virtue is repeated not only for the purpose
of emphasis but also to indicate a slightly different shade
of meaning. The term here should mean more than
"ABSENCE OF HATRED." Just as an individual will never
have, even in his dream, any idea of injuring himself, a
true seeker, in his recognition of the Oneness in all living
creatures, must come to feel that to injure anyone is to
injure himself.
ABSENCE OF OVER-PRIDE (Na-ati-maanitaa) --- To leave
off one's exaggerated notions of self-honour is,
immediately to relieve oneself from thousands of
avoidable excitements and responsibilities. Life is as light
as a feather to one who has renounced his over1115

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

exaggerated pride while to a Coriolanus, life becomes a
heavy cross, to be carried painfully, as it mercilessly cuts
through the living flesh on his shoulders.
The twenty-six qualities described above give us a
complete picture of the nature of a man of 'Divine Estate.'
These qualities are enumerated to serve as a guide to all
those who thirst to become "perfect." To the extent we are
able to reorganise our way-of-life and change our vision of
the world around us on the above lines, to that extent we
shall economise our energies, that are often wasted in idle
pursuits. To respect and live these twenty-six values of life
completely, is to assure ourselves of a right way-of-living.
HERE FOLLOWS A DESCRIPTION OF THE DEMONIAC
(ASURIC) NATURE:
4. Hypocrisy, arrogance and self-conceit, anger, and also
harshness and ignorance, belong to one who is born, O Partha,
for a demoniac-Estate.
The dark features of the ugly personalities in the world
were never before so strikingly brought within the
embrace of a simple stanza. All the Satanic forces that can
ever come to express in the bosom of man have been
brought together under some all-comprehensive 'types' of
devilish-ness, as indicated here. To know them would be a
sufficient warning of what we must avoid and what all
traits, in us, we must carefully weed out from our mental
1116

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

composition, so that the greater energy that is available to
a well-developed man, may, without any obstruction,
flow out of our bosom.
HYPOCRISY (Ostentation --- Dambha) --- 'Pretending to be
righteous but living unrighteous ways of life' is the
meaning that Shankara gives to this term. Hypocrisy is,
certainly, one of the cheapest poses assumed by the
vicious. To them, all their superficial glow of goodness
and purity, of religiosity and sincerity are but attractive
hoods to cover their deadly motives and ugly intentions.
ARROGANCE (Darpa) --- Endless pride of learning, or of
wealth, or of social status, or of family connections, gives
to an individual a kind of insufferable uppishness, and he
looks at the world and the happenings around him
through this misinterpreting and self-deluding medium
and lives in a world of imagined self-importance resulting
in an arrogance that drives away all inward peace. Such
an individual gets exiled from the love of the community
around. An arrogant man is a lonely creature in the world
and his only companions are his own imagined selfimportance and dreams of his glories which none but he
can see. And naturally he becomes highly self-conceited
(Abhimanah).
ANGER (Krodha) --- When such a self-conceited, arrogant,
hypocrite looks at the world around him and finds that
the world's estimate of him is totally different from his
own estimate of himself, he revolts within and hence his
1117

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

wrath (Krodha) at everything around him. And once such
an individual gets worked up with anger, in his speech
and action, there must necessarily be a disconcerting
insolence (Parushya).
Such arrogance, self-conceit, wrath and insolence --- arise
from his own self-delusions (ajnanam). He knows not
himself, that he is ignorant of the scheme of the world
around him, and consequently, he is blind to the right
relationship that he should maintain with the world
around him. In short, he is extremely ego-centric and he
expects the world to be what he wants it to be, and, in his
delusion, he supplies a mad blue-print prescribing how
the world of healthy beings is to behave and act in his
field of actions. This ignorance of oneself and one's
relationship with the things and beings around is the
secret cause that generally forces one to revolt against the
environments and act quixotically.
Such people are termed here by Krishna as the
'Diabolically Fallen,' the Asuric. Such a spectacular
contrast provides by the picture of the Asuric, as given
here, gloriously brings out the earlier picture of the
'Divinely Good' --- the Daivic, in relief.
THE EFFECTS OF THE TWO NATURES --- THE
DIVINELY GOOD AND THE DIABOLICALLY FALLEN -- ARE SPOKEN OF AS FOLLOWS:

1118

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

5. The divine nature is deemed for liberation, the demoniacal for
bondage; grieve not, O Pandava, you are born with divine
qualities.
On hearing such an exhaustive enumeration of the
qualities in the good and the bad hearts, it will be natural
for every sincere student of the Geeta to feel a despair not
knowing whether he himself belongs to the latter or the
former category. Generally, one would find it easier to
consider oneself bad rather than feel the confidence that
one belongs to the good. Arjuna must have felt the same
despair and, perhaps, reading this in his face, Krishna
consoled him: "GRIEVE NOT, O PANDAVA! YOU ARE
BORN OF THE DIVINE ESTATE." That a seeker has the
necessary interest and perseverance to read the Geeta up
to this chapter, itself shows that he belongs to the
'DIVINELY-GOOD' category!
Both the ethical beauties and the non-ethical ugliness are
painted here not for the purpose of sending the good to an
eternal heaven and of damning the vicious to a perpetual
hell! Here, the theme is taken up on a more scientific basis.
Ethical virtues are the intelligent ways of reviving man's
exhausted energies and fatigued spirit to live. By living
these healthy values of a righteous life, the individual
unshackles his psychological personality from its selfmade entanglements: "THE DIVINE ESTATE LEADS TO
RELEASE." As a contrast to this, the negative tendencies
cultivated by the 'Diabolically Fallen' are self-made
shackles that chain a man to a realm of confusions and
1119

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sorrows, forbidding him to grow into the ampler fields of
his own inner possibility: "THE DEVILISH TO
BONDAGE."
GRIEVE NOT (Maa shuchah) --- To become sentimental
and desperate or to exhaust oneself in self-pity, or selfcondemnation, is a psychological malady, and one
suffering from it can never discover in oneself, the
energising cheer, the sustaining confidence, and the
steady will that are required for an intelligent selfdiagnosis and an effective self-cure. To a seeker, living the
ethical values is, in itself, a kind of treatment to cure him
of some of his personality-diseases. To the Hindus, a
sinner is not a dangerous mental leper, or a failure of the
Omnipotent Lord. To a Vedantin, Satan is not a perpetual
challenge to God.
The good, contaminated by weakness and 'ignorance,' is
the evil. And the evil, when cured of 'ignorance,' itself
becomes the good. A looking glass covered with dust,
cannot reflect light, and mirror properly the objects in
front of it. This is not because the glass has lost its capacity
to reflect, but because its effectiveness has got veiled at
present by the accumulated dust, which is essentially
something other than the glass. To wipe it clean is to bring
forth from it more clarity and light for the reflection. A
'Diabolically Fallen' one has also the same Infinite Light of
Pure Wisdom --- but alas, extremely dimmed by false
values and wrong concepts in his bosom.
1120

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

TAKING UP THE 'DIABOLICALLY FALLEN,' KRISHNA
SCIENTIFICALLY
ANALYSES
THEIR
MENTAL
CONTENTS, AND THEY ARE SEPARATELY OBSERVED
AND STUDIED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
6. There are two types of beings, in this world, the 'divine' and
the 'demoniacal; ' the divine have been described at length; hear
from Me, O Partha, of the demoniacal.
According to Krishna the entire creation falls under two
categories: the 'Divinely Good' (Daivic) and the
'Diabolically Fallen' (Asuric). But in fact, there is yet
another group, the 'Incorrigibly Indifferent' (Rakshasic)
about whom the Lord is serenely silent. This silence
regarding them is perhaps more eloquent than all his
eloquence regarding the other two groups! Religions and
the techniques of self-development are addressed only to
the former two groups and not to the Rakshasic type of
men. They have not yet sufficiently grown in their
evolution; they are still in the hands of the moulding
Nature and they have yet to be properly baked in the
furnace-of-life and its scorching experiences. As they grow
up sufficiently, they come under the category of the
"Diabolically Fallen," and religion can come forward to lift
them to the status of the "Divinely Good." From then
onwards it can show them the way to experience and
realise the Absolute Goodness which is the Eternal
Reality.
1121

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

If all about the Asura type was given in a broad sketch
earlier, (XVI-4) the details are being filled in elaborately in
the following stanzas.
In almost all religious text-books of the world, the positive
qualities of goodness and righteousness are glorified. But
they rarely paint, exhaustively, the negative tendencies in
a devilish personality. Some critics of Hinduism are
jubilant in discovering this tendency in our scriptural texts
as a great weakness in our prophets and seers. This
criticism against Hinduism was levelled mainly by the
critics of the nineteenth century. They are very silent
nowadays because of the results of the twentieth century
psychological researches and the success of some of the
psychiatric methods. To become poignantly aware of the
negative tendencies in one's own personality-structure,
and to become consciously disgusted with those vulgar
urges, are the ways of easily eradicating such wrong
tendencies from one's inner nature. Be aware of a
weakness; it readily disappears from our character --- says
the modern psychiatrist.
The bad is not merely an opposite of the good. It can never
be that the good has certain urges and the bad has another
type of urges. Human urges are always typical, and both
the good and the bad are expressions of man's heart. Bad
is only "GOOD MISCONSTRUED." Therefore, in the
enumeration of the qualities of the bad, we do not have to
meet with a sapless list of the opposites of the previous
enumeration which pointed the good. As we discover the
1122

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

contents of the bad mind, we shall discover that they are
all the very same as those of the good, but mis-applied
under a wrong enthusiasm created as a result of some
false evaluations. Virtue, poisoned with ignorance is evil;
evil, treated and cured of its poison, when it regains its
health, becomes virtue.
THUS THE VERY FIRST STANZA WHICH PAINTS THE
ASURIC TYPE OPENS, AS IT WERE, WITH AN
APOLOGY FOR THE 'DIABOLICALLY FALLEN,'
ALONG WITH A POWERFUL SUGGESTION ELICITING
OUR MOST TENDER KINDNESS TOWARDS THEM:
7. The demoniac know not what to do and what to refrain from;
neither purity, nor right conduct, nor truth is found in them.
WHAT TO DO AND WHAT TO REFRAIN FROM --- The
men of Asuric nature know not either 'action' or 'inaction.'
Here 'action' means any intelligent piece of work
undertaken and pursued with a right motive so as to gain
for ourselves a better inner satisfaction.
Religious acts, selfless work and dedicated service are all
examples of right actions whereby the individual gains
not only immediate profits, but also the ultimate inner
heightening of culture; for he will then be working
without losing sight of his Higher Goal. 'Inaction' here
means forbidding ourselves from striving in the right
channels, and that can bring about only restlessness for
1123

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ourselves and for others. The list enumerating the
negative tendencies of the 'fallen' starts with the idea of
'ignorance.' This is very significant. If any one commits a
crime in 'ignorance,' though justice may not accept it as an
excuse, the heart of the society will readily discover a
tender forgiveness for the erring soul.
NEITHER PURITY NOR RIGHT CONDUCT NOR
TRUTH IS FOUND IN THEM --- Outer cleanliness is, to a
large measure, a reflection of the inner condition. A
disciplined man with education and culture alone can, in
fact, maintain a systematic order and cleanliness around
him.
One who is incapable of deciding the actions to be
pursued as well as those to be avoided by him, has no
harmony within; and therefore, there is no inner purity, or
outer cleanliness (shaucha), for such an individual. If the
mind is indisciplined there cannot be a decent, and wellregulated life, since outward behaviour (Achara) is nothing
but an expression of the mind. Therefore, Krishna
indicates that in them good conduct is conspicuous by its
absence.
He who is confused about 'action' and 'inaction,' who has
no purity, or external cleanliness, and who fails in good
conduct, cannot maintain TRUTHFULNESS in his words.
All through, if you read these terms very carefully in the
spirit in which the Divine Charioteer has given them out
you will find in them a divine tenderness for such
1124

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

'Diabolically Fallen' folks. There is no revengefulness for
the sinner anywhere, even hinted at, in the entire length of
the Geeta. It is a logical conclusion that such a man must
necessarily be untruthful in words, not because he is
deliberately pursuing dishonesty, but because by
temperament he is incapacitated to be honest.
MOREOVER:
8. They say, "the universe is without truth, without (moral)
basis, without a God; not brought about by any regular causal
sequence, with lust for its cause; what else? "
In the description of the 'Diabolically Fallen,' we recognise
the picture of an utterly sceptical materialist who looks at
life from his own limited intellectual standpoint, and who,
naturally, fails to recognise any final purpose or
permanent substratum for this seemingly confusing array
of illogical happenings. Such materialists, however, have
stalwart intellects and are capable of original and
independent thinking, but they have to be a wee bit
trained, to see something beyond what their general
observation and analysis can discover for them. The
materialist view-point of life and the world are explained
in the stanza.
WITHOUT TRUTH (Asatyam) --- Even when they are very
scientific in their observation and analysis, the materialists
fail to recognise the Truth that upholds the Universe. They
1125

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

recognise change, and the constant change itself is
accepted by them as the world, without having for it any
steady and changeless substratum. At the same time,
scientists admit that change is a relative phenomenon and
without a changeless, constant foundation, change cannot
take place and give us the impression of continuity.
Without a screen, steady and motionless, a running film
cannot be projected; without a constant bed, the waters of
the rivers cannot flow continuously. The everchanging
universe cannot give us a constant APPEARANCE
without its having a steady and changeless 'foundation.'
This eternal and unchanging Reality behind the everchanging Universe is called the Truth. According to the
materialist, "the Universe is without Truth (Asatyam)."
WITHOUT A LORD: (An-Ishwaram) --- There is no
substratum; at least, is there a commanding intelligence
that orders, regulates, and generally guides the
happenings in the world? According to the materialist
there is no such Director of Events, no Architect of
Happenings. There is no Creator, no Sustainer.
NOT BROUGHT ABOUT IN REGULAR SEQUENCE --The entire universe of beings and things is formed only as
a result of mutual combinations of the great elements and
the sole ruling factor that determines Creation is "chance";
and the only deciding urge, propelled by which beings are
born, is nothing but 'lust.' Even modern psychologists
insist that the sex urge alone is the mother urge because of
1126

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

which everything is happening, every achievement is
gained and every profit is made everywhere in life.
AFTER DESCRIBING THUS, THE POINT OF VIEW OF
THE PURE MATERIALIST, KRISHNA SYMPATHISES
WITH THE LOT OF SUCH MEN AND TRACES THEIR
INSTINCTIVE DEEDS:
9. Holding this view, these ruined souls of small intellect and
fierce deeds, come forth as the enemies of the world, for its
destruction.
HOLDING THIS VIEW --- Holding the view, as described
in the previous stanza, that the world has no substratum,
that there is no controlling power, and that the world
continues to exist and procreate by itself, if a society were
to live, giving full vent to animal nature, it will only
achieve restless-ness and strife, disaster and destruction
for itself.
RUINED SOULS --- A balanced personality can only be
for the individual who has, to begin with, a clear
conception and a correct judgement of himself. Whenever
an individual forgets himself, he acts in a manner
unbecoming to the dignity of his birth, education, culture
and social status, like a mad man or a drunken fool. When
a materialist thus works in ignorance of his own divine
status, he, naturally, behaves as though he is an animal --insulting the divine status of his own evolution.
1127

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

OF SMALL INTELLECT (Alpa-Buddhayah) --- Once an
individual refuses to recognise the "Divine Presence of
Truth," embracing and underlying life, he will function in
life as a self-centred, selfish entity, endlessly striving to
eke out his own personal satisfaction from the material
world. Seeking complete fulfilment in the gratification of
his sensual urges, he strives hard but discovers only a
carping disappointment, a burning hunger and a sense of
defeat in life. Krishna, in his infinite kindness,
sympathises with such men and calls them "MEN OF
SMALL INTELLECT."
FIERCE DEEDS --- "If a materialist does not want to
believe in the Eternal Reality, and if others must believe in
some Permanent Truth, why not allow equal freedom to
both --- the believers and non-believers?" This is a natural
question that will arise in any man, if he be truly
democratic and tolerant in his point-of-view. Anticipating
such a doubt in a sincere student, Krishna says, in the
second line of the stanza, that when an individual loses
his faith in the Higher Reality, he becomes licentious at all
levels of his expression. Prompted by his selfish urges to
seek and discover his fulfilment in life, he would, perhaps,
ultimately bring about irremediable disasters to his era.
Historically, the world to-day is going through the same
predicament as declared and anticipated in the Geeta!!
Materialists, who do not recognise the Truth, seeking Its
expression through life's happenings, will unconsciously
1128

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

bring about such a discordant note of disharmony in the
community that it will plunge the world into a bloody
mire of disastrous wars.
THE VIEW-POINT OF THE LIFE OF A MATERIALIST
AND HIS MOTIVES IN HIS EVERY-DAY LIFE, ARE
BEAUTIFULLY DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZAS:
10. Filled with insatiable desires, full of hypocrisy, pride and
arrogance, holding evil ideas through delusion, they work with
impure resolves.
The gruesome ugliness of the inner nature of a pure
materialist, as he struts about in the fields of his
achievements, cannot be better expressed than what Vyasa
has accomplished in this stanza. For a more vivid and
thorough depiction of the mental contents of the
'Diabolically Fallen,' for a clearer description of the quality
and texture of his activities in society, one has to go
ransacking the entire existing literature of all the
languages in the world, only to fail to find a parallel to
this pregnant verse.
FILLED WITH INSATIABLE DESIRES --- Activities are
not at all possible unless they are instigated by desires.
Where desires have ended, the expression of dynamic life
in achievements is impossible. And yet, to remain as
1129

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

victims of desires, is to be some horrid machines of
activity, vomiting out into the world our inner poison of
ego and ego-centric passions. To sustain life only for the
satisfaction of desires is unintelligent; for they have a
knack of multiplying themselves as we go on satisfying
them one after another. They are 'hard to appease.' Filled
with insatiable desires, when a man uses his intelligence,
abilities and knowledge, he naturally brings about an
endless stream of disturbances in and around him.
FULL OF HYPOCRISY, PRIDE (CONCEIT) AND
ARROGANCE --- Desire is but an expression of the ego
when the seeker seeks a permanent satisfaction and
infinite fulfilment through sense enjoyments. When he is
thus deluded in the misconception of his ego-vanity,
negative tendencies such as hypocrisy, pride (conceit), and
arrogance will naturally rise up, and smothered by them,
he ceaselessly strives to satisfy the unending demands of
his own unbridled desires.
VICTIMS OF DELUSION --- Desire cannot come to the allfulfilled. Desire can come only to him who fails to feel his
own Infinitude and expresses himself as a limited ego
(Jiva). Forgetting his own divine nature, in his
identification with the unreal things and values of life, he
develops in himself a hunger to enjoy peace and
happiness. Naturally, numerous desires arise in him and
seeking fulfilment of all such desires, he indulges in sensegratification.
1130

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THEY WORK WITH IMPURE RESOLVE --- The mental
biography of the 'Diabolically Fallen' (Asuras) is complete
in its sequence when the stanza says that the ego,
desperately struggling to gain inner peace, must
necessarily forsake all consideration for others, ignore all
noble values-of-life, and enter into the fields of activity,
shamelessly intolerant, inconsiderate and even brutal.
Drunk with passions, opiated with his own desires, he
works in the world as a maniac, hurling blood and acid,
death and disaster all around him in the community!
The picture, viewed microcosmically, shows a materialist,
building his life upon the restless waves of his desiretossed mind. The same world-painting, when looked at
macrocosmically, portrays vividly the ugliness of
materialistic communities and nations. Life's beauty
depends upon the beauty of the philosophy upon which it
is built. If the foundations are false, the edifice, however
strongly built, will prove to be no better than a card-castle.
The economic break-up, social evils, political upheavals,
and general restlessness that are found all over the world
are all thoroughly discussed in this stanza, if we know
how to read them all into it.
It is also interesting to note how Krishna, while explaining
the 'Diabolically Fallen' (Asuras), without directly saying
so, is painting the picture of a materialist, who by nature,
is an atheist in thought and a tireless hunter of pleasure in
action. In this age of materialism, don' t we prove
ourselves faithful to the type just now discussed!
1131

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PAINTING THE CONCEPT OF LIFE IN A CONFIRMED
MATERIALIST, KRISHNA CONTINUES:
11. Giving themselves over to immeasurable cares ending only
with death, regarding gratification of lust as their highest aim,
and feeling sure that, that is all (that matters) .
ENDLESS CARES --- Wedded to anxiety and care, such
desperate men drag their life of futile endeavours along
the corridors of sobs and sorrows to the silent court-yard
of death. In an ordinary life, cares besiege the citadel of
peace and joy, especially when hosts of powerful desires
conquer the individual. The struggles-in-acquiring (Yoga)
and anxieties-in-preserving (Kshema) the acquired objectsof-desires are the contents of all cares of life. To waste an
entire life-time in such anxieties, and in the end to realise
how miserably one had failed is indeed a tragedy.
SATISFACTION OF LUST AS THE HIGHEST (Kamaupabhoga-parama) --- Consistent effort either in the field of
the good, or in the field of the vicious, put forth without a
philosophy of life that sustains the continuity of an
individual's activities, is a haphazard endeavour, ignoble
and futile.
The philosophy of life that is accepted by the 'Diabolically
Fallen' is invariably the same wherever they be. The
philosophy of the (Charvakas) atheists has been hinted at
1132

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

herein. To them, satisfaction of their lusty nature is the
goal of life and there is nothing beyond it.
ASSURED THAT IS ALL --- Generally, such materialists
are no fools; they have an ample share of a rough and
ready intellect. They do realise that a life dedicated to an
endless hunt after sense-gratifications is a tragic way of
living, and that is such a scheme of existence the
individual is called upon to pay an exorbitant price for
relatively insignificant gains. And yet, they continue,
seeking satisfaction of their uncontrolled lust. If you
question them, their answer is that life is nothing but a
series of such strifes. They know not of any life, the
contents of which are peace and joy. They are generally
pessimistic, and since they scrupulously avoid seriously
thinking about life, they invariably come to express
suicidal tendencies and homicidal temperaments.
According to them, sorrows and care alone constitute the
fabric of life. They fail to discover any harmony or rhythm
underlying the superficial disturbances in life.
Entertaining no hope, either for themselves or for the
world, they live with embittered hearts, revengefully
meeting the happenings around them in the world. In
unproductive exertions, they waste their powers only to
die a miserable death; exhausted, wearied, disappointed.
THE EXPRESSION OF THE ABOVE PHILOSOPHY IN
THE LIFE OF THE INDIVIDUAL IS DESCRIBED IN THE
FOLLOWING STANZA:
1133

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

12. Bound by a hundred ties of hope, given to lust and anger,
they do strive to obtain, by unlawful means, hoards of wealth for
sensual enjoyments.
BOUND BY A HUNDRED TIES OF HOPE, LUST AND
ANGER --- Bringing vividly to the mind of the student,
the picture of such a materialist, Krishna records in this
stanza, the activities of such an individual. Entangled by
hundreds of desires, his mental and intellectual energies
get dissipated. Such an individual becomes restless and
impatient with things that happen around him, and soon
loses his balance of mind --- his sense of judgement.
Irritated and constantly unhappy with himself and his
environments, such a man is seen in life 'GIVEN TO
YEARNINGS AND ANGER.' Wherever desire is throttled,
anger is natural. Since he is devoted to desires he pursues
sense-fulfilments, and since in the world of competition,
desire-fulfilments, often get throttled, his lusty urges get
transformed into wild and passionate anger.
THEY DO STRIVE, no doubt --- They do tirelessly and
diligently strive to satisfy their ever-increasing urges. To
secure their quota of sensual enjoyments, they must
necessarily acquire and procure objects of sensesatisfaction from the world without. They are not seeking
happiness as such or peace as such; theirs is the anxiety to
quench a nameless thirst which they are constantly feeling
--- a strange hunger they are chronically suffering from.
They have not the mental equipoise to investigate into
1134

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

their urges, and analyse and judge them properly. Madly
they strive on to acquire and possess, and in their
desperate anxiety to indulge and to enjoy, they lose sight
of the divine principles of existence and the noble dictates
of their conscience. THEY DO STRIVE, day and night, to
satisfy their inexhaustible passion, with wealth acquired
and hoarded by all known unjust means.
Though written some five thousand years ago, strangely
enough, this portion of the description of the 'Diabolically
Fallen' reads as though it were a bitter, but honest,
criticism of our own age!! Thus, if students of the Geeta
were to judge our era of brilliant scientific knowledge,
material prosperity, secular achievements and political
freedom, they will have to classify our era as of this
'Diabolically Fallen' type. Amidst the bleating sirens of our
booming industries, the horrid thuds of our modern
missiles, the devastating powers of nature that we have
discovered and released for our own destruction, we may
not give our ears to the thundering truth declared by the
'wise' men of such a distant past; but sincere students of
the Geeta cannot but perceive the unquestionable veracity
in them, and must come to feel sad for the world and age.
CONTINUING, THE LORD PAINTS THE ATTITUDE OF
SUCH PEOPLE TO LIFE:

1135

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

13. "This has to-day been gained by me" --- "this desire I shall
obtain" --- "this is mine" --- and "this wealth shall also be mine
in future. "
There is not much in this stanza that calls for explanation,
for the average man of the world to-day lives, exactly the
life suggested here. The most successful man in a
competitive world is the one who lives in constant
consciousness of what he has already acquired, and
remembers and sweats for his day-to-day ambitions, to
acquire and possess, more and more of the wealth of the
world. And the laughable paradox in the philosophy of
possession is that the more one has, the more one craves
for. No material-wealth hunter has ever declared, "I have
this much now, that will do." On the other hand, when
one gets drunk with the vanity of possession, one's
shameless cry is only: "I HAVE THIS MUCH, AND THIS
WEALTH SHALL ALSO BE MINE."
The game of desires is an endless gamble. The more one
possesses the more one is tempted to strive to possess
more. Each time a man strives to acquire something, his
desire is to feel his full share of satisfaction. But,
invariably, his experience is that he is not fully satisfied,
and in his disappointment, he thirsts for more and more
possessions. Earlier in the Geeta, it is said that "he who
has disciplined and controlled himself to such an extent
that the world of stimuli cannot create in him even a
ripple of reaction, alone knows what peace is and not the
desirer of desires."
1136

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THIS STANZA POINTED OUT THE MATERIALIST'S
ATTITUDE TO THE PHYSICAL THINGS AROUND
HIM; THE FOLLOWING STANZA GIVES US HIS
ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WORLD OF BEINGS:
14. "That enemy has been slain by me" --- "and others also shall
I destroy" --- "I am the Lord" --- "I am the enjoyer" --- "I am
perfect, powerful and happy. "
The translation of this stanza is itself its commentary. And
it is a commentary on the lives of us too! All businessmen
in the world, unknown to themselves, constantly chant
this stanza in their heart-of-hearts. "I destroyed one
competitor in the market, and now I must destroy the
remaining competitors also."... "In fact, what can those
poor men do to stop me from doing what I want?"...
"Because there is none equal to me in any respect... I am
the Lord. I enjoy, I am the most successful man. I am
strong in influence, among political leaders, in my
business connections, and in my bank balance. I am strong
and healthy...." This, in short, is the ego's SONG OF
SUCCESS that is ever hummed in the heart of a true
materialist. Under the spell of this Satanic lullaby, the
higher instincts and the diviner urges in man go into a
sleep of intoxication.
WHAT IS THE INTELLECTUAL ESTIMATE OF A
MATERIALIST ABOUT HIMSELF? LISTEN:
1137

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

15. "I am rich and well-born --- Who else is equal to me? --- I
will give (alms, money) --- I will rejoice. " Thus are they,
deluded by 'ignorance. '
Deluded by misconceptions of himself, such a man of
sickly, bloated conceit looks at the world through a mind
distorted by vanity, and wrongly judges the world and his
own relationship with it. He feels happy and
congratulates himself on his high birth and breed, on his
belongings and wealth, and fails to find anyone equal to
him. Self-exiled from society, he lives in a false castle of
vanity, suffering innumerable psychological privations.
He gloats that he will, by his ritualism, even order the
gods to serve him --- that he shall, with his gifts, purchase
the whole world. And thus glorified by the world, served
by the gods, "I shall rejoice in the world..." Such are some
of the maddest ravings of his restless heart, in the dark
depths of his utter 'ignorance.'
SUMMARISING THE THREE PREVIOUS STANZAS, IT
IS SAID:
16. Bewildered by many a fancy, entangled in the snare of
delusion, addicted to the gratification of lust, they fall into a foul
hell.
BEWILDERED BY MANY A FANCY --- When an egocentric individual, who has thus sold himself to sense1138

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

indulgence, spends his time seeking gratification from the
world-of-objects, his mind becomes ever unsteady. The
mind of an indulgent sensualist soon learns to empty its
powers of concentration and exhausts itself in its own
hallucinations, fancies and imaginations.
ENTANGLED IN THE SNARE OF DELUSION --- If the
individual's mind, as a result of its false philosophy, gets
dissipated in sapless dreams, his intellect also is in a sad
condition. His power of judgement and discrimination is
caught up in a web of delusions and false values. His
intellect, cut off from its permanent moorings, has
thereafter no platform of its own to spring from and come
to a correct judgement and evaluation of life. It fails to
recognise the permanent harmony of life, but recognises
only its own ego-centric vanities. Life looked at through
such a disturbing equipment naturally gives a distorted
view.
ADDICTED TO GRATIFICATION OF LUST --- When an
individual's intellect is clouded, his mind gets agitated,
and his sense-organs, which are the vehicles through
which the mind-intellect has to express itself, certainly
behave erratically. When a driver is drunk, the car cannot
move properly. Naturally, therefore, such an individual
becomes a victim of lust and sense-gratifications.
THEY FALL INTO A FOUL HELL --- We need not be
great philosophers to understand that such an individual,
tired physically, confused mentally, and upset
1139

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

intellectually, will live here in a self-created hell,
distributing his own personality-contents of woes to
others around him. A man can make a heaven of hell, and
a hell of heaven, by the harmony or discord in himself. A
subjectively shattered personality cannot find peace or
fulfilment in any situation. Even if the environments are
conducive, he discovers, in himself, methods of unsettling
them by his own inner sufferings.
If a single individual who has these false values, discovers
for himself but a sad world of sorrow even in the midst of
happy surroundings, we can very well understand what
would be the condition of the world when a good majority
of us are having, in varying degrees, the above qualities.
Hell and heaven are determined by the amount of discord
or harmony that we successfully bring about in our inner
makeup.
WHAT THEN ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCH
PEOPLE, AND HOW DO THEY PERFORM THEIR
YAJNAS?
17. Self-conceited, stubborn, filled with pride and drunk with
wealth, they perform sacrifices in name (only) out of ostentation,
contrary to scriptural ordinance.
Yajna need not necessarily be considered as the elaborate
ritualism described in the Vedas. But it can be interpreted,
in the Geeta style (III) as "A CO-OPERATIVE
1140

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ENDEAVOUR IN WHICH EACH INDIVIDUAL POURS
HIS BEST INTO THE ACTIVITY OF LIFE, AS AN
OBLATION TO PROPITIATE THE POTENTIAL
GOODNESS IN EXISTENCE, AND WHICH, WHEN
INVOKED, IS TO BE DISTRIBUTED EQUALLY TO ALL."
This spirit of selfless effort in the service of mankind was
described by Krishna as the greatest Yajna; WORK IS
WORKSHIP.
SELF-CONCEITED, STUBBORN, FULL WITH PRIDE
AND DRUNK WITH HIS OWN POSSESSIONS AND
WEALTH --- When an individual enters the fields of social
work or national service, he does not always do so with a
true yajna-spirit only. Inspite of very many of the leaders
and workers striving hard for the upliftment of their
country, we find that the world of our age is falling away
from peace, plenty, and prosperity. When a man of the
'Diabolically Fallen' type reaches any field of activity, in
spite of his vociferous claims of selfless service, he is
incapable of it, because of the very nature of his
personality and character. Such friends of society can
perform a yajna in name only. Unconsciously, their actions
will be poisoned by their vanity, coloured by their
sensuality, distorted by their arrogance, and generally
polluted by their false philosophy. As a result of all their
actions, sorrow alone will be the result.
SUCH LOW MEN CONTINUE FALLING LOWER AND
LOWER EACH DAY:
1141

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

18. Given to egoism, power, haughtiness, lust and anger, these
malicious people hate Me in their own bodies, and in those of
others.
Once egoism takes possession of an individual, he steadily
sinks to the ugliest depths of animalism. Drunk with
passions, he abdicates from all the dignity of a cultured
man and behaves as an ineffectual beast, strutting about
precariously on its hind legs! Such a biological freak, who
is physiologically a man but temperamentally an animal,
is the type that is now being discussed as the 'Diabolically
Fallen' (Asura).
Enumerating the inner contents of such an individual,
Lord Krishna says that he is "FULL OF EGOISM, BRUTE
STRENGTH, ARROGANCE, PASSION AND ANGER."
Any one of these is sufficient to pull one down to the
depths of depravity, but the Lord characterises the Asura -- type of man as having all these qualities, all at once. Not
only does he have these qualities --- and who does not
have? --- but, unlike an evolver, the Asuric man comes to
pin his faith on these qualities, and he struggles to
discover his fulfilment only in the expression of these
tendencies.
What is the harm if an individual lives these values? This
is a question that is often asked by an indulgent youth,
when he is advised by his elders not to live yielding
readily to his low urges and ugly temptations. The
1142

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Geetacharya here explains that the consequence of
disrespecting all cultural values, and living an uncultured
ego-centric existence of passions and desires would be
nothing short of total destruction of life.
Persons who are entertaining the above-mentioned
attitudes, would ignore the sanctity of life, and without
any compunction whatsoever, desecrate it. They will grow
malignant, and in order to satisfy the low urges of egoism,
would come to "HATE ME IN THEIR OWN BODIES
AND IN THOSE OF OTHERS." The Sacred Life, the
Paramatman, does not come out to express Its full play
when blanketed by the low sensuous urges. Ethical values
are disciplines of the thought-life, whereby a mind so
tuned up becomes the right instrument to serve faithfully
the seeker of the Self. Unethical values and immoral
intentions choke the great Melody of Life and reduce it to
a discordant, purposeless noise, shattering peace and
contentment within one's own and in another's bosom.
THE FALL IN EVOLUTION SUFFERED BY SUCH
THOUGHTLESS MATERIALISTS AS A RESULT OF
THEIR OWN FALSE VALUES AND FOUL ACTIONS IS
BEING TRACED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
19. These cruel haters, worst among men in the world, I hurl
these evil-doers for ever into the wombs of the demons only.

1143

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Specimens of the 'Diabolically Fallen' type of men are
characterised here, in a spirit of loving despair by the
Lord, "AS THE MOST DEGRADED OF MEN IN THIS
WORLD. THEY ARE MALICIOUS AND CRUEL" --malicious against the dignity of themselves, and cruel to
the living beings around. They are, says the Lord,
"THROWN BY ME PERPETUALLY INTO THE WOMBS
OF DEMONS." Here Krishna is identifying Himself with
the 'Law' of Action and Reaction --- wrong action leaves
wrong tendencies behind, and, propelled by such negative
tendencies, the personality in an individual, after his
death in this physical structure, demands an appropriate
field of existence. An Asuric individual should necessarily
discover his fulfilment only in an Asuric environment.
Therefore the 'Law' of Action and Reaction orders that
such cruel men, again and again, reach similar wombs
until the sheer horror of their experiences brings home to
them a sudden realisation of the follies and futilities in
following such a low tempo of life. The idea of
reincarnation suggested herein has already been
exhaustively discussed earlier in our discourses (VIII-6).
CONTINUING:
20. Entering into demoniacal wombs, and deluded, not attaining
to Me, birth after birth, they thus fall, O Kaunteya, into a
condition still lower than that.

1144

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Tracing the line of fall of an Asura type of man, Krishna
says that an individual having repeatedly reached, as a
result of his previous life, the same Asuric environment,
life after life, fails to realise the Infinite joys of the Self.
They never climb the heights of cultural beauty but slowly
sink lower and lower to reach the bottom grades of beings.
So far we had a vivid review of two types of men: the
'DIVINELY GOOD' and the 'DIABOLICALLY FALLEN.'
A majority of us, in varying degrees, belong to the latter
class. As a spiritual seeker is never satisfied merely with
the theoretical explanations and descriptions, Krishna
now advises the entire mankind, through Arjuna, on how
even he who has fallen so hopelessly to the Asura level,
can learn to climb up and steadily progress in his spiritual
evolution. None is eternally condemned, nor does anyone
deserve a perpetual hell --- such a view is illogical,
unphilosophic, and stupid.
DESCRIBING THE TECHNIQUE OF HASTENING
ONE'S EVOLUTION, THE DIVINE CHARIOTEER SAYS:
21. These three are the gates of hell, destructive of the Self --lust, anger and greed; therefore, one should abandon these three.
The Lord indicates here that there are three gateways to
reach HELL. Earlier in a stanza, in the very same chapter,
He described that HELL and HEAVEN are conditions
created by the mind only; they are merely subjective
1145

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

experiences in life, and the three false values mentioned
here are the main causes of the former.
DESIRE, ANGER, GREED --- The main theme of the entire
chapter is to call man away from a life of sensegratification into the ampler fields of desireless actions
and egoless perfections.
Where there is desire, anger is a natural corollary. The
constant flying of an individual's thoughts towards an
object of gratification is called 'desire,' and when the
steady flow of these thoughts of aggrandisement and
possession are deflected by some obstacle, the refracted
thoughts are called 'anger.' When disappointed in desiregratifications, a storm of revolt rises in the mind, as a
consequence of which anger soars up to toss, wreck and
sink the boat of life.
If ANGER is thus the thought-storm arising in our mind at
the disappointment of a desire, GREED is the erosion of
our mental strength and inner peace when desires are
more and more satiated. When a desire gets fulfilled, an
insatiable thirst for more and more joy holds the
individual, and this endless appetite ruins the mental
strength and saps dry the personality-vitality in the
individual. Greed is a sense of dissatisfaction constantly
pursuing and poisoning the sense of satisfaction that we
have already experienced. In an undisciplined man, there
can be no satisfaction at any time; even when his desires
are satisfied he is unhappy, because his appetite for
1146

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

enjoyment is thereby sharpened and he hungers for more;
if the desires are throttled, the disappointment brings into
him anger, and he suffers the consequent wretchedness.
If this logic about the action and interaction between
desire, anger, and greed is accepted, then we are forced to
accept Krishna's conclusion in this stanza: "THEREFORE
ONE SHOULD FORSAKE THESE THREE."
HERE
FOLLOWS
THE
PRAISE
OF
RENUNCIATION OF EGO, ANGER AND GREED:

THE

22. A man who is liberated from these three gates to darkness, O
Kaunteya, practises what is good for him and thus goes to the
Supreme Goal.
Those who are avoiding all the three gateways to hell are
complimented here. It is promised that those who avoid
derailing themselves into any of these dangerous by-paths
of self-exploitation and self-ruination, will steadily
progress on the straight path to their life's goal. To wander
into fields of desire, anger and greed is to dissipate our
energies. Devoid of the divine vitality of a fully grown
and well-balanced human personality, the seeker feels
fatigued and not strong enough to meet the terrible
challenges that arise from within himself. To overcome the
strong temptations of the sense-objects, the mind and
intellect should re-charge the individual's inner abilities
with which the individual can strive hard and effectively
1147

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

achieve self-expansion. He who is avoiding THESE
THREE GATES OF DARKNESS --- which are sure to lead
him into deeper and deeper confusions and despairs and
ultimately take him to the sub-human level of existence --will be, it is promised here, practising WHAT IS GOOD
FOR HIM.
The term 'Shreyas' has no equivalent word of the same
import in English. It does not merely mean 'good' but it
has a deeper and wider import in Sanskrit. Shreyas, when
practised, not only brings happiness to the practitioner,
but also contributes much to the well-being of the people
around him.
Progressing thus in the right direction, the individual
"GOES TO THE GOAL SUPREME." Cultural unfoldment
cannot be a miraculous overnight development. The bud
should grow, open and bloom, under the careful
nourishment of steady discipline, vigorous study and
perfect understanding. The unfoldment is more delicate
than that of a flower.
This stanza explains to the seeker what is to be avoided by
him and indicates how he will thereby have a positive
development and inner growth. But it may be asked how
a POSITIVE growth can be effected as a result of a
NEGATIVE act of denial. Avoiding bad food can preserve
health but it cannot give the positive joy of taking a
healthy full dinner. Similarly, avoiding the dissipation of
our energies through desire, anger and greed, would,
1148

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

perhaps, end all our agitations caused by these three. But
how can that create any positive development in
ourselves? The Geeta preaches a positive way-of-life; and
the stanza, as it stands, suggests this positive achievement
when it says that such an individual "PRACTISES WHAT
IS GOOD FOR HIM."
WHAT IS THE POSITIVE PRACTICE?
23. He who, having cast aside the ordinance of the scriptures,
acts under the impulse of desire, attains neither perfection, nor
happiness, nor the Supreme Goal.
The Divine Teacher of the Geeta explains that when the
ruinous expenditure of vitality, both psychological and
intellectual, is stopped and energy is conserved, it has to
be applied in the right direction. If again the energy is
misused, the chances are that the seeker would dash
himself down with a mightier bump to the depths of a
miserable life. Ravana and such other mighty Asuras of the
Puranas are typical examples of personalities that
performed fierce tapashcharya (penance), accumulated
inner dynamism, and yet achieved but a thorough selfdestruction! So mighty was their strength that they made
their own generation rock, crumble and bite the dust. To
avoid such a calamity to the individual, as well as to the
world around him, a severe warning must necessarily be
given; and these two closing stanzas contain such a
warning.
1149

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

HE WHO DISOBEYS THE SHASTRAS AND ACTS
UNDER THE IMPULSE OF DESIRE --- Such a man stands
to gain no benefit at all. Here the term Shastra need not
necessarily be understood as a bundle of ritualistic
injunctions, strictly followed and sacredly insisted upon
by the fanatic orthodox. The text-books discussing the
Theory-of-Truth (Brahma-Vidya) and the technique of selfperfection (Yoga) are called Shastras, while other
subsidiary books which explain and throw light upon the
Shastras are called Prakarana texts; the latter explain the
categories in the Science of Vedanta. Since the Geeta is a
philosophical poem, exhaustively explaining the theory
and practice of God-realisation, IT IS CONSIDERED AS A
Shastra.
UNDER THE IMPULSE OF DESIRE --- The theme
developed in the previous two stanzas is that a seeker of
the Higher, should of necessity renounce "desire, anger,
and greed." We have explained earlier that ANGER is a
product when desire is throttled, and GREED is a logical
consequence when a passionate heart gains some
fulfilment of desires. Therefore, desire is the root cause.
Naturally, Krishna contrasts the way-of-life advocated in
the Geeta with our ordinary way-of-life, wherein the main
impulse is desire. The seekers are advised not to disobey
the commands given in the Geeta Shastra and live under
the impulse of their baser appetites and lower instincts.
ATTAINS NEITHER JOY NOR SUCCESS, NOR GOAL --What exactly would be the harm if one did not implicitly
1150

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

live the way-of-life advocated in the Geeta? The
consequences of such an unintelligent and naughty
disregard of the right-way-of-life is clearly indicated here.
Propelled by desires, coaxed by greed, torn by anger and
constantly dancing to the changing tunes of the lusty
flesh, an individual comes to live a life of restless
agitations and tyrannical passions. Such a man cannot feel
any happiness or attain any cultural development.
THEREFORE THE NATURAL CONCLUSION IS:
24. Therefore, let the Scriptures be your authority, in
determining what ought to be done and what ought not to be
done. Having known what is said in the commandments of the
Scripture, you should act here (in this world) .
THEREFORE --- Because of the line of argument given in
the last three stanzas, the seeker of an ampler life must
necessarily follow the authority of the Scriptures in
planning his way-of-life. The right conduct in life can be
determined only when the individual has correct
knowledge of WHAT IS TO BE PURSUED AND WHAT
IS TO BE AVOIDED. The grand road to Truth is the same
for all. It cannot be determined by each pilgrim according
to his own whims and fancies. Shastras are declared by
those, who had travelled the road many a time. And when
the Rishis supply us with a map of the road-to-Perfection,
we, the humble pedestrians, must pursue the path
faithfully and come to bless ourselves.
1151

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

HAVING KNOWN --- Therefore, before setting out on a
pilgrimage to that Goal, every seeker is required to study
intelligently the Scriptures, which are the reports left for
our guidance by those who successfully walked the 'Path'
earlier. A correct knowledge and a clear intellectual vision
of the Goal and of the direction in which It lies, and
perhaps, of the possible difficulties en route --- are the
unavoidable pre-requisites for a seeker.
YOU SHOULD ACT HERE --- Ninety per cent of the
seekers, perhaps, 'know' the Shastra exhaustively, in all
detail as explained above, but alas, how few of them
discover in themselves the courage to live, the will to
pursue, and the patience to wait till the Supreme is
realised within themselves. Naturally, Lord Krishna closes
the chapter with the injunction that man should act,
without desire, anger, or greed. This is the right way of
action as exhaustively discussed in the third chapter on
Karma yoga).
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the sixteenth
discourse ends entitled: THE DIVINE AND THE DEVILISH
ESTATES
Om Om Om Om Om

1152

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 17
Shraddha Traya Vibhaga Yoga
The Yoga of Three Fold Faith
Arjuna said: 1. Those who, setting aside the ordinances of the
scriptures, perform sacrifice with faith, what is their condition,
O Krishna? Is it SATTWA, RAJAS or TAMAS?
In the very opening stanza, Arjuna takes up the discussion
where it was left in the previous chapter and gives it a
definite push forward, making Krishna expound
exhaustively the most profitable and dynamic way of
spiritual life, clearly distinguishing it from the
unprofitable
and
self-dissipating
channels
of
misconceived spiritual endeavours.
SETTING ASIDE THE ORDINANCES OF THE SHASTRA
--- The injunctions of scriptural texts are not generally
available for all people, and even when they are made
available, very few will have the intellectual capacity to
understand them. In the excitement of life's activities
around, and the confusions and anxieties within, very few
of us can hope to plan the "paths" of our life according to
the Shastra-provided blue-print. But a sincere seeker might
have a great 'faith' in the Higher way-of-life and a deep
devotion to the ideals preached and propounded
1153

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

generally by all the scriptures of the world. Hence this
question.
PERFORM ACTIONS (Yajantah) --- The term (Yajna) used
here need not be understood as indicating the Vedic
sacrifices and ritualistic performances only. The Geeta is
quite a complete scripture, and as such, it has its own
definitions of terms. The term Yajna has been earlier (in
Chapter III) defined to include all selfless co-operative
endeavours of every individual in a society, undertaken to
bring forth to manifestation, the latent wealth and
prosperity that are in that community. Therefore, all acts
done by an individual during his life, in a spirit of selfless
dedication to the general well-being can come under this
term. Without knowing the serene harmony that throbs
behind life, can one, who is striving hard in the world in a
spirit of detachment and selflessness, hope to avoid
agitations? What would be his condition (Nishtha)? And in
a parenthetical clause Arjuna adds what he wants to
know: "whether such actions of men fall under the
category of 'unactivity' (Sattwa), or of 'activity' (Rajas), or
of 'inactivity' (Tamas)."
The Blessed Lord said: 2. Three-fold is the faith of the embodied,
which is inherent in their nature --- the SATTWIC (pure) , the
RAJASIC (passionate) and the TAMASIC (dull, dark) . Thus
thou hear of it.

1154

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

As a preface to his discourse, the Lord says that 'faith'
(Shraddhaa) itself is of three kinds: the divine, the
undivine, and the diabolic. Shraddhaa determines the
texture of our impressions (vasanas) in us, which, in their
turn, command our view-of-life. Our desires, thoughts,
and actions are charted by our view-of-life. Naturally, an
individual's physical activities, psychological behaviours,
and intellectual make-up are all ordered by the type of
Shraddhaa he has come to maintain in himself. And, if the
Shraddhaa is of the wrong type, the entire expression of his
personality, in all walks of life and in every field of
endeavour, can only be ugly. As his inner disposition, so
will be the man. The more an individual identifies himself
with his physical sheath, the more crystallised becomes
his ego, under the influence of his inner disposition. The
temperaments that rule the behaviours of the human are
three in number, the 'Good' (Sattwic), the 'Passionate'
(Rajasic) and the 'Dull' (Tamasic).
WHY SHOULD WE TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION
THESE TEMPERAMENTS AT ALL, AND TRY TO
UNDERSTAND THE TYPES OF FAITH AND THEIR
PLAY IN LIFE? THESE ARE EXPLAINED IN THE
FOLLOWING:
3. The faith of each is in accordance with his nature, O Bharata.
Man consists of his faith; as a man's faith is, so is he.

1155

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ACCORDING
TO
ONE'S
OWN
NATURE
(SATTWAANUROOPA) --- The type of faith that feeds
and nourishes each bosom is, we notice, vastly different
from that of another. The more we observe the differences
the more we are led to inquire why it should be so. The
Lord, in the Geeta, explains that the 'faith' in each heart is
ordered by its own nature. It is very difficult to say
whether 'FAITH' prescribes the nature or the nature
prescribes the 'FAITH'; each is intimately wedded to the
other, each obeys the other most faithfully, indeed.
However, the Geeta declares that it is the nature in an
individual that rules his 'FAITH;' although, if FAITH can
be broken and remoulded, as it can be, sometimes, at the
irresistible compulsion of painful experiences, the nature
of that one does faithfully obey the new Shraddhaa. But,
generally speaking, the 'FAITH' in each man takes the hue
and quality from the stuff of his being --- the predominant
temperament in him. The essence of 'FAITH' lies in the
secret energy of the ego with which it holds on to its
convictions, to reach a definite, chosen end, by wellthought-out and entirely self-planned means.
Man's potentiality determines his 'FAITH' to a given end,
and this 'FAITH' then reacts upon his potentiality,
determining his future course, and moulds the being in
the man. Both act and react upon each other. That the
nature of man is determined by the preponderance of any
one of the gunas over the others, has been already
discussed (XIV-10). As a result of previous conservation of
1156

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

a particular tendency, one of the 'qualities' gains a
preponderance over the other two, even from one's
childhood. This is indicated here by the term Sattwa,
according to which (Anuroopa) is the 'FAITH' entertained
by the individual.
SHRADDHAA IS THE INDIVIDUAL --- Man is
constituted of and exists in his Shraddhaa. Each devotee
ultimately reaches the seat of his devotion, if he
consistently, and with sufficient intensity, devotes himself
to its attainment (VII-20 to 23).
AS A MAN'S FAITH SO IS HE (Yo yat Shraddhaah sa eva
sah) --- Man is verily what his FAITH is. The type of
personality and its effectiveness or otherwise are all
determined by the 'FAITH' under which it functions. That
the achievement of life, is ever coloured by the type of
'FAITH' with which the individual pursues his activities,
is very well known and realised by all men of action. In
the very language of the Geeta this idea is already
explained in an earlier chapter (IX-23).
4. The SATTWIC , or "pure" men, worship the gods (DEVAS)
; the RAJASIC or the "passionate, " the YAKSHAS and the
RAKSHASAS; the others --- TAMASIC people, or the "dark or
dull" folk, worship the ghosts (PRETAS) and the hosts of
BHUTAS, or the nature/spirits.

1157

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

SATTWIC MEN WORSHIP DEVAS --- Every man in life
brings his entire devotion and offers it at one altar or
another, and seeks fulfilment from the benefits that accrue
from the invocations. In scriptural language this is called
WORSHIP. This need not indicate only the ritualistic
worship of some God or deity. The term WORSHIP here
embraces a wider implication. Every one of us is a
WORSHIPPER at some altar chosen by him; even atheists
are worshippers... perhaps they devote themselves to the
alter of sense-objects, or of wealth, or of power. In this
ampler meaning, if we are to read the stanza, the meaning
becomes very clear indeed. Men of Sattwic temperament,
because of their serene composure and tranquil
disposition, seek their fulfilment at an altar of divinity
indicating the Higher impulses and the nobler qualities of
their being. Naturally, they seek and come to adore such a
divine Godly altar.
YAKSHAS AND RAKSHASAS BY THE RAJASIC --- Men
of 'passionate nature' (Rajas) are those who have extreme
ambition and are constantly restless in their self-chosen
fields of activity. They are said to be worshipping and propitiating demi-gods (Yakshas and Rakshasas). The idea here
is that the choice of the altar will depend upon the silent
demands of the heart of the devotee. One will never go to
a bookstall to purchase some dress. So too, the active and
the passionate type of men can feel an admiration for, and
can appreciate, only an equally active and passionate
(Rajasic) demi-god or deity.
1158

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE TAMASIC MEN (WORSHIP) THE PRETAS AND
BHUTAS --- The dead 'spirits' and such other low and
vicious powers are invoked by the men of 'inactivity'
(Tamas) for the satisfaction of some of their low urges for
vicious sense-gratifications. Men of low moral calibre and
false education, generally, would try to fulfil their
pernicious ambitions with the help of the wretched
vengeful scum of the society (Pretas, Bhutas), who, though
physically alive, are dead to all sweetness and goodness in
life. These hired goondas (thugs), generally chosen from
professional jail-birds, are the fit powers to be invoked in
order that low and criminal ambitions of the Tamasic can
be fulfilled.
The same import has been brought out in many earlier
stanzas (VII-20 to 23; IX-23 to 25). The modern man would
be rather curious to know whether there really exist such
powers and deities as pretas and bhutas. It is in fact
immaterial for the purpose of studying this portion of the
Geeta whether such powers REALLY exist or not. They
are indicative of certain types of powers which are
available in this world of ours.
"The help gained from good friends," the "protection
invoked from the rich and the powerful," and the
"enormous strength gathered from the low thoughtless
men of criminal intentions" --- these are the different types
of 'altars' at which men of serenity (Sattwic), of ambition
(Rajasic), of heedlessness (Tamasic), generally seek their
individual satisfaction. From the nature of a man's field1159

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of-activity, we can, to a large extent, understand to what
type he belongs.
THAT THE SPIRIT OF DEVOTION IN MEN, EVER
REMAINING THE SAME, EACH WILL SELECT
ACCORDING TO THE TYPE OF HIS 'SHRADDHAA,' HIS
OWN ALTAR OF DEVOTION, HAS BEEN SHOWN IN
THE ABOVE. THE WRONG WAY OF STRIVING IS
PAINTED BELOW:
5. Those men who practise terrific austerities, not enjoined by
the scriptures, given to hypocrisy and egoism, impelled by the
force of lust and attachment . . .
6. Senselessly torturing all the elements in the body, and Me
also who dwells within the body --- you may know these to be of
'demoniacal' resolves.
Over-enthusiasm can produce only a physical exhaustion,
and an inward fatigue. No spiritual unfoldment can be
expected from unintelligent expenditure of energy in
wrong channels merely because it is undertaken in the
name of religion. The majority of seekers mis-apply their
energies and come to suffer. Therefore, Krishna considers
it easier to paint the picture of the false seekers and
ridicule their unintelligent methods.
Physical restraints and self-denials are, no doubt,
sometimes prescribed for some sturdily-built types, for
1160

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

some limited period. At the same time it is not proper or
correct to believe that any kind of self-denial would
constitute an austerity, and that by following it, creative
unfoldment of the inner personality-structure could be
successfully brought about. The austerities must be
scientific, and therefore, not against the injunctions laid
down in the sacred books that discuss this subject.
Some people generally undertake severe austerities only
as a show. Men 'GIVEN TO OSTENTATION AND
EGOISM' are not fit for austerity. They remain mentally
unfit for Tapas as long as they are lusty and extremely
attached to the world-of-objects around. Such individuals
cannot practice austerities.
Even when such people practise austerities and develop
some inward dynamism as a result of their tapas, their
intentions being gross, they will only misuse the newfound strength in wrong channels, and in the end, bring
about their own self-destruction --- the famous examples
of Rakshasas in the Puranas are illustrative enough. Such
people, practising austerities, regardless of the correct
injunction of the Shastras, belong to the Asuric type.
ME, DWELLING IN THE BODY --- Such unintelligent
austerities not only oppress the elements constituting the
physical frame but also the Sacred and the Divine Lord
within. Life gets choked as it were in such an individual -- meaning, Life cannot express its fullest beauty through
such a broken form. Extreme tapas is stupid and is
1161

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

condemned here. Intelligent control is tapas, not cruel selftorture!
THE THREE KINDS --- THE SATTWIC, THE RAJASIC,
AND THE TAMASIC --- OF FOOD, OF WORSHIP, OF
AUSTERITY, AND OF GIFT ARE DISCUSSED IN THE
FOLLOWING STANZAS:
7. The food also which is dear to each is three-fold, as also
sacrifice, austerity and alms-giving. You may now hear the
distinction of these.
Introducing the theme that is to follow, Lord Krishna
enumerates the topics that He is going to discuss. The
temperamental influences that govern the mind and its
thought-life express themselves in all departments of
activity in which the individual employs himself. His
choice of food, of friends, of the type of emotions in his
bosom, of the
view-of-life that he will be entertaining are all indicative
of the type to which the seeker belongs. As a matter of
fact, everyone living on the surface of the earth expresses
himself in one of these classifications, due to the
preponderance of one or the other of the three
temperaments (gunas).
Yajna, Tapa, Daana --- In the choice of 'food,' in the type of
'sacrifices' which he would feel inspired to make, in the
1162

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

texture of his 'self-denials,' and in the quality and quantity
of his 'charity,' he will declare himself as belonging to one
or the other of the three types.
Here follows a detailed analysis of one's inner nature, and
naturally, one's outward expressions, when one is under
the irresistible influence of any one particular guna. These
verses are NOT to be misconstrued as ready-reckoners TO
CLASSIFY OTHERS. Hinduism, in its essential beauty, is a
subjective science for bringing about a fuller unfoldment
of the dormant potentialities in AN INDIVIDUAL'S OWN
PERSONALITY. In unravelling the beauties of the soul
and in exploiting the strength of the heart, each one will
have to purify himself from the dullness of Tamas, and
from the agitations of Rajas, and keep oneself in the
creative alertness and spiritual glow of Sattwa.
HEREUNDER, WE FIND ENUMERATED A SERIES OF
SYMPTOMS BY WHICH WE CAN CORRECTLY
CLASSIFY OURSELVES:
8. The foods which increase life, purity, strength, health, joy and
cheerfulness (good appetite) , which are savoury and oleaginous,
substantial and agreeable, are dear to the SATTWIC (Pure) .
In describing the natural taste for some particular types of
food in good men of spiritual urges (Sattwa), it is said that
they like only such diet which increases the vitality
(Aayuh), and not sheer bulk; which supplies the energy for
1163

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

meditative purposes (Veerya); which discovers for them a
secret strength (Bala) to resist the temptations for the
sense-objects; which provide health (Aarogya) so that they
may not often fall ill and suffer a break in their regular
sadhana. Such people will have a natural inclination to take
food which will augment joy (Preeti) and inner
cheerfulness (Sukha). In short, such creative men, by their
own choice, enjoy only food that is clean and wholesome
with no chance for them, when consumed, to putrefy
within.
All the different types of food eaten by man in the world
have been classified and brought under four types on the
basis of their physical properties. They are the savoury,
the greasy, the firm and the cordial types of food. Men of
purity instinctively like all these types of foods when they
have the above-mentioned effects upon the consumers --when they (the consumers) have digested and assimilated
them.
No doubt, food has certain effects upon the eater.
Generally, an eater is, to some extent, conditioned by the
type of diet he eats. Not only is our inner nature built by
the type of food consumed, but the inner nature, in its
turn, commands our tastes; and we find very often that we
have developed an irresistible appetite for certain types of
food. In the case of animals it is noticed that sometimes
they change their diet, according to their physical need in
life; dogs and cats are often seen eating grass, cows licking
salt-slabs, etc., children eating sand, and pregnant women
1164

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

manifesting different tastes at different periods of their
pregnancy.
EXPLAINING THE RAJASIC TYPE OF MEN AND THEIR
TASTE IN FOOD, THE LORD SAYS:
9. The foods that are bitter, sour, saline, excessively hot,
pungent, dry and burning, are liked by the RAJASIC , and are
productive of pain, grief and disease.
Men of energy, the 'passionate,' desire such food
(Rajasasya ishtaah) that have strong flavour and dense
taste. Bitter, sour, saltish, very hot, pungent, harsh,
burning tastes are to the liking of all vigorous men,
restlessly striving to fulfil their uncontrolled passions and
desires (Rajasic).
Such a diet, no doubt, creates in an individual brilliant
energies, but in their wildness, they are, to a degree, uncontrollable; and therefore, in their final reactions they
lead the eater towards a life productive of 'PAIN, GRIEF
AND DISEASE.'
A student of these discussions in the Geeta is NOT
justified, if he considers that, by a control of diet the
thought-discipline in himself will also be brought about.
From these stanzas, we have to understand that, when the
texture of thought improves, the individual finds himself
1165

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

changing his tastes: even his choice of food which would
give him full satisfaction in totally revolutionised.
WHAT TYPE OF FOOD WOULD MEN OF DARKNESS
(TAMAS) CHOOSE?
10. That which is stale, tasteless, putrid and rotten, refuse and
impure, is the food liked by the 'TAMASIC. '
(Yaata-yaamam) --- A day is divided, in our old calculations
in the Shastras, into eight Yaamas, wherein a period of
three hours constitutes a Yaama. Therefore, food cooked
three hours earlier, 'gone cold' is that which is considered
as spoiled. In these days of canned food, preserved fruits,
stored vegetables and refrigeration facilities, almost a
substantial majority of us have come to love stale food.
TASTELESS (Gata-rasam) --- In South India, we find a
peculiar hunger for taking rice that has been kept soaked
in water the previous night. The next morning, it becomes
both stale and tasteless. I suppose, in the north, some like
old roti.
FOUL-SMELLING (Pooti) --- Men of inertia have a natural
liking for stinking food that has an insufferable smell for
others. The pulav of the modern tables perhaps belongs to
this category; so too, prawns --- we can multiply
examples. 'Men of purity,' however, would instinctively
1166

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

revolt against a diet that has any stink about it, e. g.,
seafood.
STALE (Paryushitam) --- Food that has been cooked overnight, or that has been kept for days together. Here we can
include all the fermented drinks, which the Tamasic people
love to drink. All drinks are fermented and the 'kick' in
them increases as the time after preparation increases.
Unsanitary and unclean food seems to attract the taste of
all despicable men of insufferable ignorance and low
culture. They love to eat 'refuse' (Ucchishtam) that is left
over, and impure (Amedhyam) filthy food that is not fit for
human consumption. The above-enumerated list is a
comprehensive report on the base and disgusting tastes of
Tamasic men of low culture and dull discrimination.
WHAT TYPE OF SACRIFICES THESE THREE CLASSES
OF MEN WOULD THEMSELVES ENGAGE IN,
CHEERFULLY?
11. That sacrifice which is offered by men without desire for
fruit, and as enjoined by ordinance, with a firm faith that
sacrifice is a duty, is SATTWIC or 'pure. '
After exhausting the classification of the temperaments as
determined by tastes exhibited by different people in the
world, the Geeta continues to indicate how, in the very
type of activities undertaken, there is an unmistakable
1167

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

declaration of the temperamental beauty, or ugliness, of
the individual.
PERFORMED BY MEN DESIRING NO FRUIT --Sacrifices undertaken by men of purity are always
executed in a spirit of selflessness. We have already
explained, earlier in the Geeta, that burning anxiety for the
fruits-of-action is an unprofitable channel of dissipation of
the sacred and vital human energy. Fruits belong to future
periods of time, and to waste the present in anxiety over
the future, is indeed an unintelligent policy of existence.
AS REQUIRED BY ORDINANCES --- Actions in the
world fall under four categories, according to ancient
Vedic lore. Of them 'desire-ridden' (Kamya) and positively
self-insulting, and therefore 'forbidden' acts (Nishiddha)
are the two types that are to be studiously avoided. The
other two classes: (a) (Nitya) the 'daily duties' and (b) the
'special duties' on special occasions (Naimittika) are the
types of actions that should not be avoided but must be
most diligently pursued. These two types --- Nitya and
Naimittika together constitute what the Shastra terms as the
'unavoidable' or 'obligatory duties.' These actions and
duties are indicated here as those required by ordinance.
This term is used here in contrast with the Tamasic type of
activity, 'wherein no ordinance is observed' and men are
always devoid of 'faith' (XVII-13).
SACRIFICE IS OUR DUTY --- This is the motive that
propels the 'good' to act in life. He suffers no dissipation
1168

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of his inner energies either through anxieties to drive
himself to a particular goal or through his restlessness in
herding the environments to settle themselves into a preplanned and pre-conceived system of harmony. His mind
is ever at rest in its own native satisfaction. He is
consciously happy that he is pursuing a line of action
which is most conducive to the welfare of all. Such actions
are classed under the Sattwic type of sacrifices.
12. The sacrifice which is offered, O best of the Bharatas, seeking
for fruit and for ostentation, you may know that to be a
RAJASIC YAJNA.
WITH A VIEW TO GAINING FRUIT --- In order to gain a
chosen result, some people act in the world, and naturally,
while in the field of activity, they are much too preoccupied with their anxieties and worries. They grow
more and more nervous at their own imaginary fears --they ever live in an atmosphere of fear as to whether they
will gain a particular chosen goal or not.
FOR OSTENTATION --- There are others in the world
who act, ever so vigorously, not necessarily for gaining
any predetermined goal, but merely for satisfying their
vanity by exhibiting their wealth or knowledge, thus
proving themselves to be the show of society. Ordinarily,
there are many who work in the world and make such
sacrifices. These do not constitute divine acts, nor can they
1169

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ever be expected to yield a reward of cheerfulness or inner
peace.
Such sacrifices undertaken by men who are anxious to
reach a particular goal and who work for satisfying their
vanity in the community, are to be understood as Rajasic.
THE TAMASIC TYPE IS NOW TAKEN UP FOR
DISCUSSION:
13. They declare that sacrifice to be TAMASIC which is
contrary to the ordinances, in which no food is distributed,
which is devoid of MANTRAS and gifts, and which is devoid of
faith.
Disobeying all the prescriptions laid down in the
scriptures and acting against all Vedic injunctions --contrary to all the principles laid down by the Science of
right living --- the sacrifices performed become of the
lowest type. Such a sacrifice cannot at all bring about
happiness either to the performer, or in its final analysis,
to his generation.
WITHOUT DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD --- The utter
necessities of life are, in the vocabulary of the modern age,
indicated by the familiar phrase 'food-clothing-shelter.' In
the scriptural language of Hinduism, the term 'food'
indicates all these necessities of life. A man of sacrifice and
right action cannot expect any inner development because
of his actions, unless they are accompanied by a mental
1170

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

development and an expansion in love which makes him
share whatever he has with the have-nots.
Apart from the above-mentioned two, when rituals are
conducted without mantra or without distribution of
reward for the educated (Dakshina), those sacrifices are
classified as Tamasic.
IN ORDER TO CLASSIFY THE THREE TYPES OF
TAPAS, PURSUED BY THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF
PEOPLE, HERE WE HAVE THREE CONSECUTIVE
STANZAS DEFINING AND EXPLAINING WHAT
TAPAS REALLY MEANS:
14. Worship of the gods, the twice-born, the teachers and the
'wise' ; purity, straight-forwardness, celibacy, and non-injury;
these are called the "austerity of the body. "
WORSHIP OF THE DEVAS, THE TWICE-BORN, THE
GURU, AND THE WISE --- To maintain an attitude of
attunement with a Higher-ideal, whereby the meditator
develops in himself the qualities of the meditated, is called
'worship.' All cultural development, moral growth and
ethical unfoldment can be accomplished only through
these processes implied in 'worship.' It is almost like "the
touch method" of magnetisation. One who is trying to
come away from one's inner personality-encumbrances
must necessarily have an attitude of devotion and
reverence towards the ideals represented in the Deva, the
1171

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DEITY, worked out and lived by the TWICE-BORN,
preached by the Guru and recommended by the WISE.
TWICE-BORN (Dwija) --- The term indicates the Brahmins;
and the term Brahmin means one who has realised the Self.
Born as we are from the wombs of our mothers, we are all
born as humans with certain intellectual beauties, no
doubt, but also with many moral defects. Born out of the
womb all right, but we are yet in the womb-of-matter! To
hatch ourselves out of our matter-identifications and to
emerge into the joy-of-Perfection is to grow into the
Divine Estate of Godmen. This is conceived in our
philosophy as the "second birth," and one who has
accomplished it is called the "twice-born," and one who
has accomplished it is called the "twice-born": once born
from the womb, and for a second time grown out of all the
limitations suffered by the Spirit in Its seeming
identifications with matter.
PURITY AND STRAIGHT-FORWARDNESS --- The
impor-tance of these two has been discussed earlier.
External cleanliness, not only physical but also
environmental, is an unavoidable qualification for a true
aspirant. Unless a seeker diligently practises straightforwardness in his dealings with others he will be
developing in himself a split-personality, which will drain
away all his composure, tranquillity and mental vitality.
Brahmacharya --- Constant revelling in the contemplation
of the Supreme Brahman is called Brahmacharya This is not
1172

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

possible unless our nature is turned away from bodily
indulgences in sense-objects and our minds are trained to
turn inward to the Spirit. Therefore, all mental disciplines,
by which we come to develop in us this introspection, are
together comprehended by the term 'Brahmacharya.'
Likewise, a medical college student is called a doctor,
because he is applying himself to the direct means for
becoming one, and the means are not far from the end.
NON-INJURY --- This term has already been discussed
many times very exhaustively. Refraining from bringing
about any harm to others in society with the mind is called
'non-injury.' Physically, it is impossible for us to continue
our existence without bringing, even unconsciously, some
sort of injury to others, but our attitude can be changed, so
that the seemingly unavoidable harm itself can bring
about a great blessing to the world. A doctor ripping open
a patient's abdomen with a sharp knife, though doing an
act of injury, can ultimately bring about a cure for the
patient's illness. Diligently avoiding all acts of injuring
others from our emotional and intellectual realms is the
strictest 'non-injury'that can be practised in life.
All that has been so far explained constitutes bodily
asceticism: physical austerity (Shaareeram Tapas).
Austerity (Tapas) is not a life of brutal self-denial only. On
the other hand, it is an intelligent method of living in right
relationship with the world-of-objects, thereby avoiding
all unnecessary dissipations of our vital energies. The
1173

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

energies that are so economised and conserved are
thereafter directed and employed in cultivating creative
fields. This scheme --- of discovering precious new
energies, conserving them intelligently, and directing
them into more profitable fields of spiritual enquiry --- is
called Tapas, self-control. Conservation of energy, and
redirection of the same to fertilise fresh fields of
cultivation within one's own bosom are all meant herein,
and the stanza concludes with a clear endorsement that
this is true Tapas intelligently pursued at the body level.
TAPAS IN SPEECH IS NOW DESCRIBED:
15. Speech which causes no excitement, and is truthful, pleasant
and beneficial, and the practice of the study of the VEDAS, these
constitute the "austerity of speech. "
Speech is a powerful vehicle in man and it reflects the
intellectual calibre, the mental discipline and the physical
self-control of the speaker. Unless he is well-formed at all
these levels, his words will have no force... no magic about
them. Again, speech is the constant activity of all and it is
an outlet through which the greatest amount of one's
energies are wasted. To control and conserve this
unproductive waste of energy would constitute a great
inner wealth indeed for the seeker.
This does not mean that one must keep a self-ruining,
disgustingly irritating, silence (Mouna). The power of
1174

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

speech must be made use of for integrating the personality
of the seeker. There is an art of using this power in the
right way, beneficial to the aspirant as well as to others.
The technique of employing speech in the most profitable
way is being indicated here in this stanza. The idea
suggested in the previous stanza is being more and more
deepened by the clear suggestions contained in this stanza
that Tapas is not a diabolic act of breaking and destroying
oneself but it is a benevolent scheme for re-making and
rediscovering oneself.
SPEECH THAT CAUSES NO SHOCK --- The words
spoken must be such that they bring no disturbance to
others; they "should neither be irritating nor obscene." The
real touch-stone to know whether we are speaking the
right words or not is the reaction of the listeners, which is
expressed so unmistakably on their faces. But generally,
people speak with their eyes shut, or even when they are
open they are as though blind. Many a miserable man has
failed in his efforts in life, and lost all his friends and
relatives merely because of the bitterness of his tongue,
the harshness of his words, the stink of his indiscreet
thoughts!
TRUE, AGREEABLE AND BENEFICIAL (SATYAMPRIYAM-HITAM) --- Words uttered to express the truth in
an agreeable style for the blessing of others constitute
"speech," which, when properly handled and made use of,
will bless the speaker himself.
1175

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In telling a lie, a lot of energy is wasted and this waste is
avoidable if one adopts the policy of truthfulness in his
expression. Words that harmoniously bring forth the exact
shade of ideas in the intellect are "truthful" expressions,
and those that deliberately distort the intentions and
meanings of the intellect are called falsehood. In the name
of truthfulness one can become a disagreeable creature in
society. This is not allowed in a seeker. The Geeta accepts
only that speech as truthful WHICH IS ALSO
AGREEABLE. By unsaid words the Lord's Song seems to
say that when a truth is disagreeable to others, the speaker
is required to maintain a discreet silence!
It is not sufficient that the words in the speech should be
honest and agreeable, but they should also be beneficial.
Speech should not be wasted. Unprofitable talking is a
great drain upon man's energies. Talk only when you
want to express agreeable ideas of permanent values,
which will be useful to the listeners. Those who are
respecting these qualities in their day-to-day vocal
activities can be considered as men performing
"AUSTERITY IN SPEECH."
REGULAR STUDY OF THE SCRIPTURES --- Control of
speech certainly does not mean entering into a state of
inert and lifeless silence of the grave. Investing the
energies of speech in self-profiting and self-creative
channels of endeavour is considered by Krishna as "tapas
in speech." Swadhyaya is a technical term used in our
sacred literature to indicate the careful study of and deep
1176

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

reflections upon the theme of the scriptures. The vital
energy so economised in daily life through a policy of
"speaking only that which is beneficial, agreeable and
truthful," is invested in chanting, in reflecting upon, and
in meditating over the mantras of the Upanishads and other
scriptures.
This stanza is complete in its explanation of the technique.
The first line indicates the channels of economy possible in
the daily expenditure of energy. The second line shows
the avenues of investment wherein the seeker can expect
to gain for himself a greater dividend of a fuller joy. Both
the schemes so suggested completely indicate the
"AUSTERITY IN SPEECH."
TAPAS OF THE MIND IS NOW TAKEN UP FOR
DISCUSSION:
16. Serenity of mind, good-heartedness, silence, self-control,
purity of nature --- these together are called the "mental
austerity. "
If the five noble values-of-life enumerated herein are
lived, they, in their aggregate, effectively produce the
"tapas of the mind." SERENITY OF MIND can be gained
only when our relationship with the world at large is put
on a healthier basis of understanding, tolerance, and love.
One who is an uncontrolled sensualist can have little
1177

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

serenity or composure. Mind runs out through the sense
organs into the sensual fields to eke out its satisfactions.
The driving force that sets the mind on its endless errands
is an intellect, ever seething with desires. Quietude of the
mind can be gained only when it is protected from both
the inflow of the stimuli from the tempting sense-objects
of the outer world, and the whipping desires that march
out from the intellect to drive the mind out into the fieldsof-enjoyment. In fact, a seeker who has discovered for
himself a divine ideal --- in the contemplation of which his
mind forgets to run about, or his intellect overlooks to
send out new desires --- alone can hope to win the serenity
of the mind (Manah-prasada).
KINDNESS (Soumyatwam) --- That warm feeling of
affection for all, which readily rises in a heart of true
devotion and love, is kindness. And that kindly seeker
who lives in this divine attitude towards all things and
beings around, will have no chance of entertaining the
feeling that he is outrageously molested by, or even
temporarily upset with his environment.
SILENCE (Mouna) --- We have already noted that "not
speaking" is not "Mouna." In this stanza, while
enumerating the "austerities of the mind," Lord Krishna
speaks of "silence." It is neither a contradiction, nor a
mistake. Silence of speech must arise from the relative
silence of the mind. Thus Mouna means that noiseless
inner calm, which one comes to experience when
1178

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

corroding passions and exhausting desires are no more
building up in one's mind. "Mouna" (silence) can also
mean "the State of Muni," implying "the State of constant
contemplation."
SELF-CONTROL --- The three above-mentioned qualities -- serenity of composure, constant kindness towards
others, and unbroken, calm silence within --- are
impossible unless we are able to control our inner nature
deliberately. The animal in us is generally very powerful,
and unless we are ever vigilant, the lower nature in us
may upset our inner balance and equanimity.
HONESTY OF MOTIVE --- Self-control is not possible
unless our motives are pure and serene. Without any
definite goal in life, without planning our onward march
towards the ideal, we are apt to fall a victim to the various
temptations en-route, and exhaust ourselves in the
bylanes of life. To stick constantly on to the grand road to
success is to assure for ourselves a happy pilgrimage to
Truth. The urge in us that motivates all our mental
activities must be inspiring and divine, or else the chances
are that we will be undermining our own perfections and
ruining our own chances of making life a great success.
The above three stanzas thus give us a clear picture of
what is true Tapas, in our bodily contacts with the world
outside, in our speech and in our mental life. The very
same Tapas is pursued by different people, and even when
they do so, with equal faith, each of them is observed to
1179

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

gain different results. This is not accidental. The people
who do Tapas (Tapaswins) are of different temperaments:
the 'good' (Sattwic), the 'passionate' (Rajasic) and the 'dull'
(Tamasic). According to their governing temperaments
they act differently, with different tempo and with
different emphasis, so that they come to reap diverse
results from the different types of tapas performed by
them.
IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS, THE THREE TYPES
OF 'TAPASWINS' AND THE NATURE OF THEIR TAPAS
ARE INDICATED:
17. This three-fold austerity, practised by steadfast men, with
the utmost faith, desiring no fruit, they call 'SATTWIC. '
When men practise austerities of body, speech and mind,
steadily "with no clinging attachment to, or anxiety for,
the fruits thereof," their tapas falls under the type: the
Sattwic. The "good" are those integrated men who refuse
to worry about the future, because they know that, in the
harmony in nature, the "future is the resultant of the total
past modified by the present. Since the perfection and
efficiency of the PRESENT activities determine and
command the FUTURE results, it is certainly unintelligent to worry over the FUTURE and spoil the very
quality of the PRESENT activities. Thus the "good,"
desiring no fruit, but all the same practising, with great
1180

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

sincerity, the three-fold tapas as explained above, come to
reap a large dividend from their austerities.
18. The austerity which is practised with the object of gaining
good reception, honour and worship, and with hypocrisy, is here
said to be RAJASIC, unstable, and transitory.
Penance that is performed with a view to gaining respect,
honour and reverence is said to be of the Rajasic type,
performed generally by men of "passionate" nature. Self
control and self-application pursued not for the purpose
of one's own inner development, but only for hoodwinking the world and getting cheap respect, reverence or
worship, is indeed, one of the basest deceits that a man of
culture can ever practise. Earlier Shri Bhagawan Himself
(III-6, 7) called such men hypocrites. Seekers belonging to
this group perform austerities mainly for their
propaganda value, and hence, Bhagawan says that their
tapas is "with ostentation" (Dambhena).
One may wonder what harm is there in practising this
type of tapas? After all "tapas," as we observed, "is
economy of thought-forces and the intelligent
reinvestment of the economised energy into more creative
fields of self-development." And yet, the Geetacharya
condemns those who perform tapas with this wrong
motive, and declares that such tapas is "UNSTABLE AND
TRANSITORY." Any intelligent self-effort, ordinarily, has
a time-lapse, before it can produce its results. Self1181

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

application must be constant and continuous in order that
it may produce substantial results. When tapas is
performed with such a low motive as of winning
respectability in society, it cannot even gather the
necessary amount of intensity and thus, tapas of the
"passionate" can only end in a lot of unproductive and
painful self-denials.
THE DULL-WITTED PURSUE THE TAMASIC TYPE OR
TAPAS:
19. That austerity which is practised with self-torture, out of
some foolish notion, for the purpose of destroying another, is
declared to be TAMASIC.
Tapas undertaken with a foolish obstinacy by means of
self-torture, and "austerities" indulged in for the sake of
destroying others are of the lowest type. A Tapaswin must
have clear notions as to why he undertakes the Tapas. And
also, he should know what is Tapas and how to do it.
Without a correct knowledge of the technique, no seeker
can independently walk the 'path' of inner integration and
gain spiritual fulfilment.
When the Vedic notion of Tapas is misconstrued, the seeker
will, at best, be only torturing himself. Self-torture cannot
bring about any unveiling of the true beauty of the Soul; it
can only create a ludicrous caricature of the Perfection in
us. Twisted and torn into a disfigured personality,
1182

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

perverted in its emotion and unclean in its ideals --- this
alone can be the outcome of any unintelligent austerity.
And when these misconceived and wrongly practised
austerities are undertaken by any one for bringing about
sorrow and discomfort to others, such Tapas is considered
as Tamasic.
CHARITY ALSO CAN FALL UNDER THREE KINDS:
20. That gift which is given, knowing it to be a duty, in a fit
time and place, to a worthy person, from whom we expect
nothing in return, is held to be SATTWIC.
The gift which is given to someone because of one's
conviction that "it is an act that is to be done," is the right
type of charity. The recipient should be one who can do
no service in return (anupakari). The right type of charity
expects the benefactor to make no discrimination against
the recipients of his charity. A gift is always to be offered,
in a fit place and time, to a worthy person. Such charity,
made with RIGHT faith, to the RIGHT person, at the
RIGHT time and place is of the Sattwic type.
There is a school which believes that charity must be given
just as a tree gives its fruits. The fruits on a tree are
available to all who come under its shade --- irrespective
of their race, status or sex. They argue that as the trees do
not make any discrimination between one enjoyer and the
1183

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

other, so too man should, without making any
discrimination between one recipient and another, share
his possessions freely.
Many will find it difficult to believe in, and live up to, this
principle. The Geeta insists, and rightly so, that man must
use his faculty of discrimination and see whether his
charities are reaching the deserving members in the
community.
THE RAJASIC TYPE IS DESCRIBED BELOW:
21. And that gift which is given with a view to receiving in
return, or looking for fruit again, or reluctantly, is held to be
RAJASIC.
That which is given in charity with a hope of receiving in
return some benefit, be it in any form --- perhaps at a
different time and place --- is of the "passionate type." And
also, a charity that is done reluctantly, not conscientiously,
is of the same Rajasic type. In our everyday worldly
activities, many of our gifts fall under this category.
THE DULL TYPE OF CHARITY IS BEING DESCRIBED
NOW:

1184

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

22. The gift that is given at a wrong place and time, to
unworthy persons, without respect, or with insult, is declared to
be TAMASIC.
Gifts that are made at an improper time, and those made
at the wrong place, to an unworthy person, without
respect, or with contempt, are charities of the dull-witted,
and they are called the Tamasic.
Charity must come from within, as an expression of an
irrepressible urge of one's own heart. Intelligent charity
must spring from the abundance felt within the
individual. He who feels impoverished by his giving has
not done a charity by the mere physical act of giving
away.
THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS ARE GIVEN WITH
A VIEW TO PERFECTING SACRIFICES, GIFTS,
AUSTERITIES, ETC.:
23. "OM TAT SAT" --- this has been declared to be the triple
designation of BRAHMAN. By that were created formerly, the
BRAHMANAS, VEDAS and YAJNAS (sacrifices) .
Om Tat Sat --- This is being declared as the triple
designation (Nirdesha) of Brahman. A Nirdesha, generally
given in ritualism, is that by performing which any defects
that are in the sacred worship are all removed. Each
action, no doubt, has its fruit, but the fruit depends not
1185

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

only on the action as such, but also on the purity of the
intentions and motives entertained by the performer.
However diligent the performer of the sacred acts may be,
if the motive behind such acts be foul, they are rendered
too ineffective to yield rich dividends. Actions performed
by all of us, may appear similar, but the results thereof
would vary from individual to individual, according to
the essential quality of their intentions.
The brilliance and glory of our intentions can be
heightened by the remembrance of the Lord. Dissociation
of oneself from one's Matter-envelopments is at once one's
awakening and identification with the Lord. To the extent
the sacred activity is selfless, to that extent its rewards are
pure. To liquidate the ego, the individual must gain the
consciousness of his spiritual status.
"Om Tat Sat" is a sentence of three words, each denoting
one aspect or the other of the Reality. Om represents the
Transcendental and the Pure Self, the Absolute and the
Unborn, which is the Infinite Substratum upon which the
projections of the body, mind and intellect are maintained.
The term Tat is used in our scriptures to indicate the
Eternal Goal, the Changeless and the Ever-perfect. In the
famous grand declaration of the Vedas, "Tat-twam-asi," the
term 'Tat' indicates that from which everything has come,
in which everything exists and into which everything
merges back in the end. Sat means 'existence.' The
"Principle of Existence" functioning through all things --1186

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

perceived, felt, and thought of in our everyday life --- is
called Sat.
Thus, to invoke the thoughts of Om, which express the
TRANSCENDENTAL ABSOLUTE, or to invoke "Tat," the
UNIVERSAL TRUTH, or to cherish the concept of "Sat,"
the REALITY, is to tune up our instruments of action and
thereby chasten all our activities in the world outside.
The Eternal Reality, indicated in the triple designation of
Brahman "Om Tat Sat," is the Source from which all castes,
the Vedas and the sacrifices proceeded, even at the time of
Creation. All super-impositions can only arise from, exist
in and disappear into that which is their own substratum.
All human activities and endeavours can be classified
under the heads: (a) activities (Ahaara) undertaken for the
maintenance of the body, and (b) activities (Niyata) that
nourish the culture by all co-operative activities pursued
with a spirit of dedication (Yajna), all charities (Daana),
and all intelligent methods of self-control (Tapas).
WHEN ARE WE TO USE THE TERM "OM"?
24. Therefore, with the utterance of 'OM' are begun the acts of
sacrifice, gifts and austerity as enjoined in the scriptures,
always by the students of BRAHMAN.

1187

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The term OM is uttered while acts of sacrifice, gift and
austerity are undertaken by the followers of higher life. To
cherish in our minds the divine awareness and the
absolute supremacy of the Infinite, as expressed in OM, is
to add purpose and meaning to all our acts of sacrifice,
charity and austerity. To invoke in our minds the divine
concept of the Absolute is to free our personality from its
limited fields of ego-centric attachments. When a mind is
thus liberated from its limitations, it becomes more
efficient in all austerities, more selfless in all Yajnas, and
more liberal in all charities.
WHEN IS "TAT" USED?
25. Uttering "TAT" without aiming at the fruits, are the acts of
sacrifice and austerity and the various acts of gift performed by
the seekers of liberation.
THOSE WHO ARE SEEKERS OF LIBERATION --- He,
who is thus trying to "liberate" himself from his own
attachments, selfish desires, self-centredness, and the
consequent agitations, should undertake to perform all his
activities in such a way that the causes that generate these
disturbances (vasanas) in him are not thereby nourished,
but are deliberately extinguished. The stanza is providing
a TIP to the seekers on how this subtle result can be
achieved through actions performed with the right mental
attitude.
1188

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WITH THE UTTERANCE OF THE "TAT" ALONE, THE
ACTS OF SACRIFICE, PENANCE AND GIFT ARE
UNDERTAKEN BY THE SEEKERS OF FREEDOM,
WITHOUT EXPECTATION OF ANY REWARD. 'Tat'
indicates, as we have already explained, the "Universal
Truth" and it declares "the oneness of all living creatures."
To remember the larger interests of the family is to forget
our own self-interest; to work for the community is to
obliterate our own family-interests; to work for the
national redemption is to overlook the limited community
benefits; and to work for the world and humanity is to
sink our national interests. Thus, to work in the field of
yajna or tapas or daana with a mind that is tuned up to Tat,
"the universal oneness of the Spiritual Truth," is to work
with no ego, and consequently, redeem ourselves from the
thraldom of the flesh, from all the limitations of Matter.
WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF REPEATING 'SAT'?
WHAT ARE ITS IMPLICATIONS?
26. The word "SAT" is used in the sense of Reality and of
Goodness; and also, O Partha, the word "SAT" is used in the
sense of an auspicious act.
Sat is used to mean both REALITY and GOODNESS. It is
also used for all praise-worthy actions. In our everyday
contact with the world, we live in a realm of RELATIVE
REALITY and a seeker is apt to take the world perceived,
felt and thought of --- through the play of his body, mind
1189

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and intellect equipments --- as ABSOLUTELY REAL.
Therefore the term Sat is often used to remind us that all
these RELATIVE REALITIES have the self-same
substratum Sat, the Absolute Reality.
THE USE OF THE DESIGNATION 'SAT' FOR BRAHMAN
IS GIVEN AS FOLLOWS:
27. Steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity and gift is also called
'SAT' and also, action in connection with these (for the sake of
the Supreme) is called 'SAT. '
The term Sat is used to indicate a man's faith and devotion
in sacrifice, austerity and gift. Thus Sat registers one's faith
in the principles underlying Yajna, Daana and Tapas and
also in his various acts of sacrifice (Yajna), charity (Daana)
and austerity (Tapas).
In short, even acts of sacrifice and austerity, when they are
not of the Sattwic type can be rendered "good," when they
are pursued with this required inner attunement which is
gained by invoking in the performer's bosom the concept
of --- the Supreme (OM), the Universal (Tat), and the Real
(Sat) --- the Infinite Brahman. If these chantings are
undertaken with faith and sincerity the seeker's mind
expands and gives up all its selfishness and arrogance.
Ego and ego-centric desires bring about attachments,
which, in their turn, destroy the freedom of the individual
to grow into the ampler field of joy of
1190

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the Spirit.
To cut off these shackles which are forged in the fields of
activity, we have to re-enter the very "realm-of-action" and
persuade ourselves to perform such 'right' Karmas as will
liquidate the bad reactions (Karma-Phala), of the 'wrong'
actions of the past. This unwinding of the vasanas, the very
creators of our psychological imperfections, can be
effected only in the field-of-activity. This is accomplished
by an intelligent, right adjustment of our mental attitude
all along, when we are at work. The required changes are
brought about by the remembrance of the Infinite Reality
as indicated by the three terms "OM-TAT-SAT." The
fundamental principle is that the actions can leave behind
only such reactions as are ordered by the type of motives
and attitudes of the performer.
ALL THESE ACTS BECOME PERFECT ONLY WHEN
DONE IN FULL FAITH. THEREFORE:
28. Whatever is sacrificed, given or performed, and whatever
austerity is practised without faith, it is called 'A-SAT, ' O
Partha; it is not for here or hereafter (after death) .
In this thundering negative statement, we have an
indication that faith is man, and an individual without
faith, even if he performs a most glorious act, "IT IS NOT
FOR HERE OR HEREAFTER." Action can create only such
effects as are ordered by the ardour of faith and conviction
1191

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

of the performer, together indicated here as 'steadfastness'
(Sthiti). The intellectual values entertained by the seeker
will supply the glow in his actions, and since the results of
his actions always depend upon the sincerity and ardour
with which the actions are undertaken, the good or the
bad effects of his actions directly depend upon the
"strength of faith" with which the actions are undertaken
or performed.
Herein, we have a conclusive statement that whatever
sacrifice is made, whatever penance is performed, or
whatever charity is given, it is called 'Asat,' if it is
undertaken 'without faith.' Unreality or non-existence, in
Sanskrit, is called Asat. From the unreal, nothing real can
ever emerge. From the unreal activity, no real result can
come. Therefore, devoted actions, spiritual or religious,
when undertaken WITHOUT FAITH, fail to produce any
result. By so saying, the Lord is indicating that Shraddhaa
is unavoidable, and that without it no progress or
evolution can ever take place.
HEREAFTER --- It is not only in the realm-of-the-Spirit
that this law holds good but also in the material world of
our day-to-day activities. This is a unique, and
unquestionable, rule of life. Without "faith," no one can
come to shine in any field of activity. No one can hope to
gather any profit at all out of any activity, if he has no
faith in it. Both in the secular activities of the market-place
and in the sacred performance of religious acts, the factor
that determines the quality and quantity of the result is
1192

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

our FAITH in our own efficiency and goodness, and in
our field of activity.
SUCH ACTS PERFORMED WITHOUT 'FAITH' BECOME
BARREN --- "ASAT" --- SAYS LORD KRISHNA.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA, in the
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the seventeenth
discourse ends entitled: THE THREE-FOLD FAITH
Om Om Om Om OM

1193

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Chapter 18
Moksha Sanyasa Yoga
The Yoga of Liberation Through Renunciation
Arjuna said: 1. I desire to know severally, O mighty-armed, the
essence or truth of "Renunciation, " O Hrishikesa, as also of
'Abandonment, ' O slayer of Keshi (Krishna) .
The chapter begins with Arjuna's question, demanding of
Lord Krishna a precise definition, and an exhaustive
explanation, of the two terms used by the Lord in the
Geeta, off and on, here and there. 'Renunciation' (Sanyasa)
and 'Abandonment' (Tyaga) are the two technical terms
used more than once in the Geeta. Though the question is
asked in a spirit of academic interest, Krishna takes up the
question in all seriousness. When a disciple expresses his
doubt, he invariably fails to express his exact difficulty.
However, it is the duty of the teacher to discover the
difficulty of the student and clear his doubt, as even the
Lord of the Geeta does here.
The logic of the entire chapter revolves around the
meanings of 'Renunciation' and 'Abandonment.' Samnyasa
without the spirit of Tyaga is incomprehensible, and if at
all it is ever so practised, it can only be a sham pose. The
bulk of the chapter maps out the tendencies, urges,
impulses and motives, that are to be abandoned, so that
1194

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

true 'Abandonment' of the undivine personality can
effectively take place. We must read the chapter in this
spirit, or else it will surely fail to influence us.
SLAYER OF KESHI (Keshi-nishudana) --- Keshi was a
Daitya who attacked Krishna in the form of a horse.
Krishna killed him by tearing him into two halves.
DEFINING THESE TERMS AND INDICATING THE
ENTIRE SIGNIFICANCE OF THEIR CONNOTATIONS,
KRISHNA SAYS:
The Blessed Lord said: 2. The Sages understand SAMNYASA
to be "the renunciation of works with desire" ; the wise declare
"the abandonment of the fruits of all actions" as TYAAGA.
"Totally giving up all desire-prompted activities" is
RENUNCIATION, and ABANDONMENT is "giving up of
all anxieties for enjoying the fruits-of-action." As they
stand, both of them read almost the same to the
uninitiated; for, all desires are always for the fruits of our
actions. Thus, "renouncing desire-motivated activity" and
"renouncing our anxiety for the fruit" would read the
same for those who see only their superficial suggestions.
No doubt, both mean giving up desire, but Tyaga is
slightly different from Samnyasa; and yet, "abandonment"
has an integral relationship with "renunciation." Action is
an effort put forth in the present, which, in its own time,
1195

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

will, it is hoped, fulfil itself into the desired fruit. And, the
fruit is what we reap later on as a result of the present
action. A desireless action, therefore, belongs to the
PRESENT, while the anxiety to enjoy the fruit (desire) is a
disturbance of our mind regarding a FUTURE period of
time. The fruit comes after the action; the fruit is the
culmination of an action undertaken in the present.
Desire and agitation bring about restlessness, and the
deeper the desire, the greater is the amount of dissipation
of our energies within. A dissipated man cannot execute
any piece of work with steady efficiency and true ardour.
Also, it is to be noticed, desire is always ordered by the
ego. Elimination of the ego is at once the sublimation of
the individuality and the ascension of the individual from
the lower realms of consciousness to the upper-most
stratum of the effulgent universal Awareness, the One
Eternal God.
The tragedy of life becomes complete if a desire-ridden
individual comes under the endless persecution of steady
anxiety to enjoy the fruits of his actions. Fruits-of-actions
belong to the FUTURE and they are always ordered by
the quality and quantity of the action in the PRESENT
moment, and also by the circumstances available in the
chosen field of activity. Naturally, without the
"Abandonment" (Tyaga) of our clinging attachment to the
expected FRUITS OF OUR ACTIONS, we will not
discover the full potentialities of our own personality.
1196

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Without this, our activities will naturally become
ineffective, and ineffective activities can never provide for
us enjoyable fruits.
In short, "Renunciation" is the goal to be reached through
the process of "Abandonment" of our moment-to-moment
anxiety to enjoy the fruits. "Abandonment" (Tyaaga) is the
means to reach the goal of "Renunciation" (Samnyasa).
Both Samnyasa and Tyaaga are disciplines in our activities.
Krishna is never tired of emphasising the importance of
work. Neither of these terms indicates that work should
be ignored; on the other hand both of them insist that
WORK WE MUST. Work, however, can gain a total
transmutation by the removal of the things that clog our
efficiency, and thus every piece of work can be made to
yield its fullest reward. Snapping the chains that shackle
us with the past and the future, and working without
being hustled by anxieties or henpecked by desires, in the
full freedom and inspiration of the present, is the noblest
way to perform actions. To a large extent, we can say that
the definition of these two terms in the Geeta is more
broad-minded and tolerant than the implications of these
two words as we read in the Vedic lore.
SHOULD THE 'IGNORANT' PERFORM WORK OR
NOT?

1197

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

3. That all actions should be abandoned as evil, declare some
philosophers; while others (declare) that acts of sacrifice, gift and
austerity should not be relinquished.
In the previous stanza it was conclusively declared that
ABANDONMENT
is
the
"way"
and
total
RENUNCIATION is the "goal." On this theory of
abandonment there is a school of philosophers, the
Sankhyas, who declare: "ACTION SHOULD BE
ABANDONED AS EVIL." According to them, all actions
are productive of vasanas which cloud the realisation of
the Self; and therefore, without exception, all actions
should be renounced. Some commentators upon the
Sankhyan philosophy point out that "WORK IS NOT TO
BE ABANDONED, EXCEPT WHEN IT IS GOING IN
WRONG CHANNELS, MOTIVATED BY DEMONIAC
URGES LIKE PASSION, GREED, DESIRE ETC."
The philosophers not only indicate that all seekers should
avoid unhealthy activities which have, in their reactions, a
deadening influence upon the spiritual beauty in man, but
also advise that every man should engage himself in
creative, character-moulding, moral-rebuilding work that
can aid the individual's personality-integration. This latter
school of thinkers recommends that 'sacrifice' (Yajna),
'charity' (Daana) and 'austerity' (Tapas) should never be
abandoned.
As students of the Geeta, we should know that Krishna
wants Arjuna only to renounce all evil activities, and
1198

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

perform worldly work in a spirit of dedicated, selfless
devotion. Krishna's Geeta calls upon man to make work
itself the greatest homage unto the Supreme; this is
SPIRITUAL 'Sadhana.'
THE LORD'S DECREE IS THAT THE 'IGNORANT'
SHOULD PERFORM WORK. NOW, AS TO THESE
DIVERGENT VIEWS:
4. Hear from Me the conclusion or the final truth, about this
"abandonment, " O best of the Bharatas; "abandonment, "
verily, O best of men, has been declared to be of three kinds.
Lord Krishna is now promising Arjuna that he will
scientifically explain what constitutes Tyaaga and under
what headings this spirit of 'abandonment' can be
considered.
For a mortal mind, GIVING UP is no easy task; acquisition
and aggrandisement are the very life-breath of man's
mind. Naturally therefore, Krishna has to invoke the best
in Arjuna by addressing him as the "best among Bharatas"
(Bharata-Sattama) and as a "tiger among men" (PurushaVyaaghra).
"Abandonment" (Tyaaga), for purposes of study and
understanding, is three-fold. All through the Geeta this
three-fold classification is followed, and everywhere we
1199

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

find that it is classed as the 'pure' (Sattwic), the 'passionate'
(Rajasic) and the 'dull' (Tamasic).
WHAT THEN IS THE FINAL DECREE? THE LORD
SAYS:
5. Acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity should not be
abandoned, but should be performed; worship, charity, and also
austerity, are the purifiers of even the 'wise. '
What has been said earlier has been accepted and
emphasised. Practice of worship (Yajna), charity (Daana),
and austerity (Tapas) should not be abandoned. We have
already found, in the previous chapter, that these, when
properly pursued, bring about a brilliant discipline within
and create conditions under which alone, the highest
spiritual unfoldment and the final experience of the
Infinite are possible. Krishna says here that these can
"purify even thoughtful men." Men of evolutionary
tendencies, who seek freedom from their personalityobsessions must, with devotion and the right attitude of
mind, perform Yajnas, Daana and Tapas. Thereby they can
discover an endless amount of inner peace and balance.
OBLIGATORY WORKS SHOULD BE PERFORMED
WITHOUT ATTACHMENT:

1200

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

6. But even these actions should be performed leaving aside
attachment and the fruits, O Partha; this is my certain and best
belief.
Even these actions, namely, 'Sacrifice' (Yajna), 'Charity'
(Daana) and 'Austerity' (Tapas) should be performed
"LEAVING ATTACHMENTS AND FRUITS." The term
"attachment" in the Geeta has a peculiar flavour, and
throughout, this term has been used to indicate the spirit
in which an ego-centric personality will come to work in
any field of activity, while fulfilling its own ego-centric
desires. Thus, an ego and its desires are the component
parts of attachments. When an ego strives to fulfil its own
burning desires, it comes to live in a certain relationship
with the world of things and objects around --- this wrong
relationship is called "ATTACHMENT."
Once an individual starts working under the poison of
"attachment," he comes to entertain an unintelligent, selfdestructive anxiety to gain and enjoy the results of his
actions. Long before the actions are completed, one's hope
and hunger for their fruits can present themselves to
weave a charm of their own, benumbing one's efficiency
in the field of the action undertaken.
The idea that CHARITY, SACRIFICE and AUSTERITY
must be performed in an attitude of "detachment,"
"renouncing all anxieties for the enjoyment of the fruits" is,
Krishna admits, his own personal opinion (matam). It is
not, however, purely an original Krishna-creed, but is
1201

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

perfectly in line with the technique of selfless action as
advised in all the Hindu scriptures.
To be rid of attachment and to be free from anxieties
regarding the fruits that are yet to present themselves as a
reward for the work undertaken in the present, are the
main limbs of the Krishna-creed in the Geeta. To live this
Krishna-way-of-action is to assure for ourselves a healthy
inner equipment, which can tenderly guide us to the
peaks of Supermanhood. The loving term used here by
Krishna in addressing Arjuna has its own appeal to the
Prince. It recommends to him the Krishna-theory of
"abandonment" (Tyaaga) as explained in this stanza.
THEREFORE, FOR A SEEKER OF SPIRITUAL
LIBERATION, WORK IS UNAVOIDABLE; AND WITH A
PROPER SPIRIT OF 'TYAGA', WORK CAN HELP HIM
ON HIS PATH. THE 'TAMSIC TYAAGA' IS:
7. Verily, the renunciation of "obligatory actions" is not proper;
the abandonment of the same from delusion is declared to be
TAMASIC (dull) .
Abandonment of obligatory duties is considered by the
Lord as the lowest and the darkest. Every individual has
his own obligations to himself and to others in society.
They include both the unavoidable DAILY DUTIES, as
well as the SPECIAL DUTIES that arise on special
occasions in the life of an individual, and in the society of
1202

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the times. Therefore, as long as an individual is a member
of the society, enjoying the social life, and demanding
protection and profit from the society, he has no right,
according to the Hindu code-of-living, to abandon his
"obligatory duties."
Even if one abandons one's moral duties in ignorance, one
is not excused; for, as in the civil laws of the modern
world and in the physical laws of the phenomenal world,
so in the spiritual kingdom also, "ignorance of the law is
no excuse." Out of ignorance and lack of proper thinking,
if an individual ignores his obligations and refuses to
serve the world he is living in, that 'abandonment' is
considered as 'dull' (Tamasic).
THE RAJASIC TYAAGA IS:
8. He who, from fear of bodily trouble, abandons action because
it is painful, thus performing a RAJASIC (passionate)
abandonment, obtains not the fruit of "abandonment. "
Someone may come to give up his individual obligatory
duties "BECAUSE THEY ARE PAINFUL" or "THROUGH
FEAR OF BODILY SUFFERING." The 'relinquishment'
thus practised falls under the "passionate" type (Rajasic).
This clearly shows in its unsaid suggestions that a man of
action and passion (Rajas) will readily undertake to act
and fulfil his obligatory duties if they are not painful, and
are not too fatiguing. To become a man of action, fulfilling
1203

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

all obligations and performing all duties without
sacrificing one's own personal comforts, is no heroic life at
all. Such actions have no special reward. In fact, Krishna
says: "HE SHALL ATTAIN NO FRUIT WHATSOEVER
OF HIS ABANDONMENT."
Performance of one's obligatory duties is itself the most
glorious of all forms of "Tyaaga," and it can be considered
doubly so, when it involves a certain amount of sacrifice
of one's own personal convenience and bodily comfort.
Arjuna himself was hesitating to fight the battle which
was his obligatory duty. Arjuna's 'relinguishment' of this
duty could be considered as falling under this category of
Rajasic Tyaaga.
Real abandonment should always lead us on to the ampler
fields of self-expression, push us into the fuller ways of
living, and introduce us to the greater experiences of joy.
A bud ABANDONS itself to become a flower, the flower
GIVES UP its soft petals and its enchanting fragrance and
gains for itself the richer status of a fruit. Every real
ABANDONMENT should haul us up into a nobler status
of fulfilment.
WHAT THEN IS THE SATTWIC ABANDONMENT?
9. Whatever "obligatory action" is done, O Arjuna, merely
because it ought to be done, abandoning "attachment and also
fruit, " that abandonment is regarded as SATTWIC (pure) .
1204

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Those who execute thoroughly all their obligatory duties
"because they are to be done" (karyam iti), because to
remain without accomplishing them is almost death to
them --- fall under the Sattwic (pure) variety. They believe
that certain acts of 'relinquishment' MUST be done, for
otherwise, according to them, it is just insufferably
indecent. When such persons, under these inspiring ideas,
come to serve the community, or work in any field, they
provide us with examples of the Sattwic type of
'relinquishment.'
Activities have certain unavoidable encumbrances. All
that the Lord says in the Geeta amounts only to this; that
we must act on without these encumbrances curtailing
and limiting our freedom of action. Thus, the tyaga of the
good (Sattwic), or real tyaga, means doing actions with the
correct mental attitude." This may seem strange, but those
who have carefully gone through these three stanzas
explaining the true type of tyaga, must have understood
that all these discussions were not so much on what is to
be 'relinquished' but as to HOW we must 'abandon,' and
in WHICH FIELD we must act. In short, Lord Krishna's
concept of Tyaga condemns abandonment of the world
and our duties in it. To the Lord in the Geeta, tyaga is a
subjective renunciation of all inner selfishness and desire,
which limit the freedom of the individual in his field-ofactivity. It is something like the abandonment that
everyone practises in his dining-room; renunciation of
hunger by positively taking the food!
1205

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In these three stanzas the abandonment (Tyaga) discussed
is not "the ABANDONMENT of actions" but
"ABANDONMENT of such things within our subjective
personality that block the free flow of our own
possibilities." Tyaga makes an active man a more potential
worker in the world.
Acting in the world outside, renouncing both the ego and
the ego-centric desires, an individual comes to exhaust his
vasanas, and grows in his inward purity.
HOW DOES SUCH A PURE MAN, PURIFIED
THROUGH 'SATTWIC TYAGA,' GAIN THE HIGHEST
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE?
10. The abandoner, soaked in purity, being intelligent, with all
his doubts cut asunder, hates not disagreeable action, nor is he
attached to an agreeable action.
The previous stanza would, at the outset, look as an
impossible thesis to any strong man of action and
adventure. Perhaps the royal heart of Arjuna could not
comprehend such a person who fulfils his obligatory duty
"only because it ought to be done" (karyamiti)" renouncing
attachment and fruit." As though answering the look of
surprise on Arjuna's face, which faithfully registers his
failure to appreciate the idea, Krishna gives in this stanza
a more elaborate picture of such an individual.
1206

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

A man established in Sattwic abandonment never hates,
nor does he ever feel attached. He is not miserable in
disagreeable environments nor does he get attached to the
circumstances and schemes-of-things which are agreeable
to his taste. He does his duties under all circumstances
agreeable or disagreeable, without feeling elated when he
finds himself on the "peaks," or feeling dejected when he
discovers himself in the "pits" of life.
He is overwhelmed neither by extreme joy, nor by
extreme sorrow; equanimity becomes his essential nature.
He stands as a rock, ever at ease, and watches with an
unbroken balance-of-vision, the waves of happenings
rising and falling all around him at all times. He is, in
short, independent of the happenings in the outer world
around him.
When, to such a man of Sattwic Tyaga, impulses such as
jealousy, anger, passion, greed etc., come, he does not get
involved in those impulses, as we do in our attachments
and identifications with them. That is, a man of
abandonment (tyaga) readily discovers in himself a secret
faculty to abandon his identification with the false, the
lower instincts in himself. He does not become a victim of
his own mental impressions (vasanas); he stands ever free
and surely apart from the tumults of his mind.
Such a man is said to be an educated and cultured man.
An uncultured man is like a dry leaf that is tossed hither
and thither by every passing breeze; is like a reed upon
1207

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the bosom of the sea, rising and falling in the mad revelry
of the tireless waves. It is the privilege of the animal alone
to get faithfully coloured by its own instincts and act
according to the dictates of its impulses. It is only man, the
inheritor of an intellect, who can enquire into the nature of
the rising waves of impulses, judge them in the light of the
ideal he holds onto in himself, and, if need be, stand apart
from them and allow them to die away.
But ordinarily, an individual finds it impossible to stand
apart and live, to act independently of his impulses.
According to the Geeta, this is because man has allowed
his faculty of 'abandonment' (Tyaga) to die away. A Tyagi
is he who has cultivated this habit to live intelligently in
life, practising from moment to moment the
'abandonment' of all the animal whisperings in himself,
and following diligently the Melody of the Soul. Such a
man is established in Sattwic Tyaga.
In order that one may come to judge correctly and
renounce the false, one must have a very clear and steady
picture of the Perfect in oneself. Medha-shakti is not merely
the intellect's power of understanding or reasoning, but it
is also the intellect's FACULTY TO MEMORISE AND
RETAIN THINGS. A cultured man of unbroken equipoise
and steady understanding must have a constant memory
of: (1) the constituents of the field of his activity, (2) the
instruments through which he contacts the world outside,
(3) his own essential infinitely divine nature, and (4) his
exact relationship with the world-of-objects when he is
1208

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

contacting it through his senses. Such a person is called
Medhaavee, "A MAN OF FIRM UNDERSTANDING." And
in case his knowledge be spotted with patches of doubts
or slightly poisoned by traces of false knowledge, there
will be in him endless confusions, which in their turn will
bring about wrong judgements. Therefore, Krishna
indicates that a man of Sattwic Tyaaga is one whose
"DOUBT IS CLEFT."
The highest type of Tyaga is not, perhaps, abundantly
found except in a minority who have accomplished their
detachments from all their matter vestures completely.
But to the majority, identification with the body-mindintellect equipment is so natural that they have the SENSE
OF AGENCY and come to live in the world, conditioned
by the happenings around.
SUCH AN AVERAGE MAN, WHO WORKS WITH AN
EGO AND ATTACHMENT, MUST LEARN TO WORK,
AT LEAST RENOUNCING THE FRUIT. KRISHNA
EXPLAINS:
11. Verily, it is not possible for an embodied being to abandon
actions entirely, but he who relinquishes "the fruits of actions"
is verily called a 'relinquisher' (TYAAGI) .
Actions we will have to perform. Without action no living
organism can continue living. Existence itself is the
manifestation of life's activities. To remain without doing
1209

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

anything is itself an action, and the physiological and
psychological actions continue upto the grave. Anything
that has a body, even a unicellular organism, can never
hope to abandon ALL activities. Actions are the insignia of
life. It is the fragrance in the flower-of-existence. Where
there is no action, there life has ended; there existence has
withered away --- the substance has dried up... stinking
death has come.
Since all of us are embodied, and therefore, cannot
abandon all activities as long as we live, the only choice
left to us is to direct and discipline all our actions in such a
way as to bring a harmony into our inner life and a
dynamic rhythm into our outer duties.
If Tyaga of the Sattwic type is not possible for all of us due
to our attachments to the world of matter, certainly we
can practise the 'abandonment' of at least our clinging
attachments and anxieties for the fruits of our actions.
Action cannot be completely abandoned by one who is
conditioned by the gross, subtle and causal bodies. Such
an individual --- and most of us at this stage of our
evolution fall under this category --- is advised by Krishna
to abandon his anxiety to enjoy the fruits of his actions
which are yet to come in a future period of time and act
diligently, entirely, and enthusiastically in the present. A
man who thus abandons the thirst to enjoy the fruits of his
action is called a tyagi.

1210

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

NOW WHAT IS THE BENEFIT WHICH COMES FROM
'TYAAGA'? THE LORD ANSWERS:
12. The threefold fruit of action, evil, good and mixed-accrues,
after death, only to those who have no spirit of 'abandonment' ;
never to total relinquishers.
The results of all actions depend, it is said, upon the
quality of the actions. Abandonment (tyaga) has already
been described as belonging to three different categories.
Here we have a discussion of the different types of
reactions that would accrue when the different types of
tyaga are practised.
Projection of a wilful desire in the world outside is an
action, and according to the purity of the motive and the
serenity of composure of the actor, a psychological
reaction is left behind at the end of every activity. The
mind has an instinctive habit of repeating itself. Future
thoughts faithfully follow the foot-prints left by the past
thoughts. Thus, actions in the world determine the
"thought tendencies" of the human mind, and these
tendencies (vasanas) condition the mental equipment and
order our reactions to the things that are happening
around.
The fruit-of-action, in philosophy, is not only its
manifested results in the material world, but also the
1211

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

subtle constitutional changes it leaves in the thoughtpersonality of man.
The total reactions gained by the mind's working in the
world, according to Lord Krishna, fall under three distinct
types: (1) the disagreeable or the calamitous --- meaning
those that are positively bad; (2) agreeable or noncalamitous --- meaning positively good; (3) the mixed type
of balanced or average --- wherein the tendencies are
balanced equally between the good and the bad.
In the constant flow of time, the PRESENT determines the
immediate FUTURE, and therefore, these tendencies, in
their different textures, must necessarily determine our
reactions to our environments in the IMMEDIATE future.
If we extend this theory to the very last moment of our
days in this embodiment, it becomes amply evident that,
after the departure from here through death, our next
embodiment and the general type of environment that we
will find ourselves in, would be determined by the type of
tendencies produced by our actions. This is what is called
the "reincarnation theory" in the Sanatana Dharma.
If the vasanas are good (Sattwic), then a joyous field of
prosperity and happiness would be the only realm
wherein such a mind would discover its destiny. Those
who are entertaining and deliberately cultivating the low
animal-vasanas in themselves will find for themselves a
complete fulfilment only by appearing in the lower strata
of life. When the 'tendencies' for good and bad are almost
1212

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

equal (mishram), then we enter into this world-of-action --the world in which we are now living --- the world of the
intelligent man. No doubt, in each of us there is a call of
the "higher" constantly leading us towards an
undetermined and indeterminable ideal, but there are also
the barkings and the brayings, the hissings and the roars,
of the "lower" in us, constantly confusing and
systematically distracting our vision of the ideal.
If an individual were to identify himself with the higher
and live up to the ideal as best as he can, the "higher"
vasanas will multiply and ultimately silence the "lower"
completely. If, one the other hand, as is the fashion in the
modern world, we allow ourselves to be tempted by the
"lower" and identify with the animal-impulses in us, they
will multiply and make us a caricature of the Divine that
we really are. In short, in the tug-of-war between the
'higher' and the 'lower,' the determining factor is the
individual's own personality.
Both these vasanas grow, be they good or bad, and in
either case, there is still a manifestation as birth in the
realm of pangs and perils. The transcendence of the
experiencer --- personality is possible only when the
conditionings have totally ended and the vasanas are
rendered powerless to hold the Pure Spirit, seemingly, at
ransom.
To explain further the difference between 'abandonment'
(Tyaaga) and 'renunciation' (Samnyasa), the Lord says here
1213

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

that for a man-of-renunciation there is no reaction either
to the actions done in the PAST or to actions undertaken
by him in the PRESENT.
This idea clearly brings out the subtle difference that the
Geeta makes between Tyaaga and Sanyasa. Earlier we
found that tyaaga is that capacity in us with which, from
moment to moment, we withdraw ourselves from the
impulses of our mind; while Samnyasa is the total
renunciation of the entire "tendencies," both good and bad
--- from their crystallisation as the "ego."
The Geeta-technique for the rehabilitation of man's
personality, so beautifully elaborated and exhaustively
discussed, when briefly put would be: (a) the seeker first
gets detached from the lower sensuous cravings and
passions by identifying himself with the nobler ideals of
self-control and moral-perfection; (b) a mind so
conditioned becomes tamer than a mind goaded by
sensuality. This purified mind develops in itself the
required amount of subtle powers of thinking, of
consistent self-application and of steady contemplation;
(c) on realising the Pure 'Be'-ness, all becomings end. To
the pure Self there is no becoming; the "tendencies" of the
mind (vasanas) cannot shackle the Spirit. Its subtle
Presence cannot but be ever Immaculate and
Unconditioned.
The "pleasant," the "unpleasant" and the "mixed" types of
reaction (Karma Phala) reach only those who have an ego1214

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

centric sense of identification with the actions as well as
their resultant reactions. Those who abandon (tyaagee)
both the sense of ego and the anxiety for the action-results
are not caught in the clutches of 'reactions'-actions.
Memories of the past are the fertile fields where desires
are cultivated and it is only in the future that the fruits are
borne by the trees of actions. Renouncing our indulgence
with the inheritance of the past and leaving all our
anxieties for the future, to serve the world as a service to
the Lord is abandonment --- tyaaga.
AFTER THUS HANDLING THE THEME OF
'ABANDONMENT' IN GENERAL, KRISHNA NOW
TAKES UP A CLOSER EXAMINATION OF IT,
DISSECTING THE VERY COMPONENT PARTS THAT
CONSTITUTE WORK:
13. Learn from Me, O mighty-armed, these five causes for the
accomplishment of all actions, as declared in the SANKHYA
(UPANISHAD) system, which is the end of all actions.
When Arjuna was thus told conclusively that action could
be performed without ego-centric desires and clinging
attachment to the fruits, as an intelligent enquirer, he had
every right to ask: "What constitutes an action?" To lay
bare the inner essence of action, Krishna analyses the
anatomy of work --- the external structure of action, and
the physiology of action --- the inner inspirations, motives
and urges in work.
1215

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Addressing Arjuna as mighty-armed, Krishna declares
that, for the real accomplishment, fulfilment or
achievement of an action, five aspects of action are
necessarily to be disciplined and marshalled. These five
are the "limbs of action" without which no action is ever
possible. When these five aspects work in happy coordination, the undertaking is assured of the greatest
success, be it secular or sacred, material or spiritual. The
term "Mighty-armed" is used to invoke the adventurous
heroism in Arjuna, for, a large share of daring courage,
consistency of purpose, faith in oneself and intellectual
heroism are necessary, if one is to discipline one's actions
and successfully accomplish a thorough cultural
development within.
In this stanza, the Geetaacharya confesses that this
enumeration of the aspects that constitute an action is not
his own original contribution, but it is exactly what is said
in the Saankhyan philosophy. The Saankhyan philosophy as
a separate text no longer exists... perhaps, here, the word
Saankhyan indicates only the Upanishads. The existing
Saankhyan books do not mention these five-fold categories.
It is reasonable to suppose that at the time of Vyasa there
might have been some books discussing this topic which
are now lost to us. However, one thing is clear: that this
five-fold division, which the Lord discusses in the
following stanzas, faithfully follows the philosophy of the
Geeta as discussed so far. The Geeta has declared that all
actions cease when the knowledge of the Self dawns, so
1216

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

that the Advaita commentator concludes: "Vedanta, which
imparts to us knowledge, is THE END OF ACTIONS."
HEREIN THE LORD ENUMERATES FIVE FACTORS
WHICH ARE THE CONSTITUENT PARTS IN ALL
ACTIONS:
14. The "seat" (body) , the doer (ego) , the various organs-ofperception, the different functions of various organs-of-action,
and also the presiding deity, the fifth.
The promise made in the previous stanza is being fulfilled
herein and Lord Krishna enumerates the five component
parts that go into the constitution of any "action." We have
already discussed that the enumeration as it stands today
in this stanza does not correspond to the Saankhyan
declaration. Commentators interpret these terms, each
slightly differently from the others, and this five-fold
division being rather obscure, the various explanations of
the commentators are not very helpful to a practical
student. However, we can see in these five terms the
twenty-four fold division of Prakriti, which the Saankhyans
hold and follow.
Every work is undertaken with the help of the "body"
(Adhishthaanam), for the body is the gateway for the
stimuli to enter as well as for the responses to exist. A
body in itself can neither receive the world nor react to it
unless there is the "ego" (Kartaa) functioning in and
1217

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

through it. There must be an intelligent personality,
presiding over its own desires, wanting to fulfil them and
thus constantly seeking a fulfilment through its body
activities. The ego sets the body in continuous activity.
When an ego, thus riddled with its own desires, wants to
seek its fulfilment in the world of objects outside, it
certainly needs "instruments" (Karanam) of perception.
Without these, the inner personality cannot come to
contact the field of enjoyment and find satisfaction in it.
The term "function" (Cheshtaa) here has been commented
upon by Shankara as the physiological activities, known
as Praana, Apaana, etc. No doubt it is sufficiently
explanatory to all students who have a knowledge of the
traditions in Vedantic thought. But to a lay student this
explanation might be rather confusing. As a result of the
physiological activities (Praana, Apaana etc.) the health of
the body gets toned up and it must flow out in its own
vigour and enthusiasm through the organs-of-action.
Thus, for our understanding of these enumerations, we
can directly take the term "function" (Cheshtaa) used here
as indicating the organs-of-action.
The organs-of-perception are presided over by the five
great elements. These presiding deities are technically
called Devas, and they indicate particular functions and
faculties in the sense-organs, such as the "power of vision"
of the eye, the "power of audition" in the ears etc. i. e., the
sense-organs must have their full vigour and must
1218

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

function properly in order to play their part in any field of
work.
Stripping off all these details of explanations, if we re-read
the stanza, it merely enumerates the constituent parts of
every action. They are: (1) the body, (2) the ego, (3) the
organs-of-perception, (4) the organs-of-action and, (5) the
five elemental forces. The stanza is dedicated merely to
enumerating these five aspects without which no egocentric activity is ever possible.
HOW CAN THESE FIVE BECOME THE COMPONENT
PARTS IN EVERY HUMAN ACTIVITY?
15. Whatever action a man performs by his body, speech and
mind --- whether right, or the reverse --- these five are its
causes.
The items listed above must all come into full play in
order to accomplish any work, and therefore, these five
component parts are called the causes of all actions. To
show that there is no exception, the Lord says that
whatever action a man might undertake, be it by his body,
speech or mind, and that too whether right or wrong, in
every expression of action there is the play of all these five
essential parts.
These five constitute the equipment of action, and the
Spirit, the eternally Actionless, conditioned by the
1219

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

intellectual desires, behaves AS THOUGH it is an ego
(Jiva); and this individualised personality, forgetting its
own State-of-Perfection demanding satisfaction through
sense gratifications, making use of the faculties of senseenjoyment, strives in the world-of-objects to achieve, to
gain, to aggrandise. Here we should not forget, in our
haste, to grasp clearly that the five-fold division is the
description of the "engine under the bonnet" and not of
the "petrol;" and yet, "petrol" in itself cannot make the
travel pleasant and successful --- nor can the "engine"
move without the "petrol."
A motor vehicle becomes an automobile only when
"petrol" plays through the "engine," and when the driver
can, by his faculties, take the vehicle to its destination,
which is determined by the demand or the desire of the
owner of the vehicle. If this analogy is understood, we can
correctly evaluate this portion of Krishna's enumeration,
and can truly appreciate what the Lord means when he
says "these five are the causes" of all work.
ALL THESE ENUMERATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS
OF THE LAST TWO STANZAS ADD UP TO THE
CONCLUSION THAT THE 'SENSE-OF-AGENCY' OF
THE SELF IS AN ILLUSION:
16. Now, such being the case, verily he who --- owing to his
untrained understanding --- looks upon his Self, which is
1220

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"alone" (never conditioned by the "engine" ) , as the doer, he, of
perverted intelligence, sees not.
In the previous stanzas we found that action belongs to
the realm of matter, no doubt IN THE PRESENCE of the
Spirit. Failing to discriminate thus between the
equipments of action and the actionless Spirit, which, in
an unhealthy combination between them, comes to
manifest as the "actor" (doer), the poor ego-centric
personality so born comes to pant and sigh at its own
disappointments and failures, or dances and jumps at its
own joys and successes. The moment an individual
becomes aware of these inner mechanisms and their play,
the delusory ego-centric individuality ends as it becomes a
mere myth of the mind, a delusory phantom of a
midsummer, mid-day dream.
THIS BEING THE CASE (Tatra evam sati) --- In all such
actions, whether good or bad, as undertaken by the body,
speech or mind, the essential component parts are the
body, ego, organs-of-perception, organs-of-action and the
elements; thus all actions belong to matter. But the Spirit,
which is the essential nature, in identifying Itself with the
matter-vestures, comes to live through the disturbing
destinies as the ever-changing man. All pangs and joys, all
failures and successes, all imperfections and impediments,
belong to the ego, which is the Spirit considering Itself as
conditioned by these components of action. The Supreme
Pure Self (Kevalam Aatmaanam) is misunderstood by the
ordinary man to be the actor (Kartaaram), and in the
1221

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

consequent ego-sense, the divinity is forgotten and the
individual comes to despair. The causes of this
misunderstanding have been indicated here. Untempered
reason (Akrita Buddhi) and perverted mind (Durmati) are
the maladjustments in an individual, because of which,
right recognition of one's own divinity is not constantly
maintained within. The implication of the statement is
that, if a seeker can integrate himself --- through the
process of disciplining his reasoning faculty and guiding
his mind away from his intellectual perversities --- that
individual will come to experience within himself that it is
only the five-fold components made up of matter that are
indulging in the agitations of the outer activity.
ELUCIDATING THE FOREGOING
VIVIDLY, THE LORD CONTINUES:

IDEAS

MORE

17. He who is free from the egoistic notion, whose intelligence is
not tainted (by good or evil) , though he slays these people, he
slays not, nor is he bound (by the action) .
So far we have been told that the realm-of-matter is the
field of all activity, and the weeds of sorrows and
agitations can grow only therein. The Spirit, the farmer,
has an existence independent of this field and yet the
farmer, in his identification with the self-projections on the
field, feels happy or unhappy according to the condition
of the field at any given moment.
1222

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Similarly, it is our unhealthy contact created by our selfprojections on to the matter-envelopments around us that
has given rise to the 'ego', which in its turn comes to suffer
the buffetings of life. Therefore, Krishna says that "HE
WHO IS FREE FROM THE SENSE OF EGOISM" and
whose "INTELLIGENCE IS NOT TAINTED" by false
values of possession, acquisition, aggrandisement, etc.,
does no action even though activities take place all around
and even through him; "THOUGH HE SLAYS THESE
PEOPLE, HE SLAYS NOT."
This does not mean that a man-of-Wisdom, who has
withdrawn from his false evaluation of matter, will no
longer act in the world. He will not remain like a stone
statue. The statement only means, that even while he is
acting in the world, to him it is all a self-entertaining
game. It is always our ego-centric clinging that leaves
impressions (vasanas) in our mind and thus actions of the
past come to goad us on to more and more activities. A
man-of-Perfection who has the necessary discriminative
intellect, learns to detach himself and act, and therefore, in
him the footprints of the past activities cannot beat out
any deepening footpath.
Krishna says: "THOUGH HE KILLS, HE KILLS NOT;
NOR IS HE BOUND." If we were to compare the results of
the lusty, passionate acts of some self-seeking murderer,
with the honourable heroic activities of some devotedly
dedicated warrior championing the cause of his country's
freedom and independence, we shall easily understand
1223

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the above assertion of the Lord. The murderer develops
vasanas, and propelled by his tendencies, he again and
again commits heinous crimes and disturbs the society,
while the hero on the battle-front, though he too kills
many, returns from the battle-front as a more educated,
noble, and refined personality. In the former, there is the
"ego," and therefore, the foul vasanas get registered; while
in the latter, the soldier's mind was fixed in his love for the
country, and therefore, the murderous activity on the
battle-front could not leave in him any ugly mental
residue. Once the ego is surrendered in the consciousness
of the Divine, the "BONDAGE OF VASANAS CAN NO
MORE REMAIN IN HIM."
AFTER THUS DESCRIBING THE "CONSTITUENTS
THAT
MAKE
UP
ANY
ACTION,"
THE
GEETAACHARYA DESCRIBES THE "IMPULSES TO
KARMA" AND "THE BASIS OF KARMA":
18. Knowledge, the known and knower form the three-fold
"impulse to action" ; the organs, the action, the agent, form the
three-fold "basis of action. "
In the scientific treatment of the subject-matter, Lord
Krishna had already explained the constituent parts that
make up an action and also indicated that the entire
assemblage is of matter only. Continuing the theme, he is
now trying to explain the three-fold impulses that propel
1224

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

activity (Karma-Chodanaa) and also the basis-of-action
(Karma-Sangraha).
The "impulse to action," according to Krishna, is a
threefold arrangement made up of "KNOWLEDGE
(Jnaanam), THE KNOWN (Jneyam) AND THE KNOWER
(Parijnaataa)." These three are called technically in Vedanta
as the 'Triputi': indicating the 'experiencer,' the
'experienced' and the resultant 'experience' --- the
'knower,' the 'known' and the 'knowledge.' Without these
three no knowledge is ever possible, as all "impulses to
act" arise out of a play of these three. The EXPERIENCER,
playing in the field of the EXPERIENCED, gains for
himself the various EXPERIENCES; and these constitute
the secret contents of all actions.
The "impulse to action" can spring either from the
"experiencer," in the form of a DESIRE, or from the
"experienced," in the form of TEMPTATION, or from the
"experience" in the form of similar MEMORIES of some
past enjoyments. Beyond these three there is no other
"impulse to action" (Karma-Chodanaa).
The "impulse to action," when it has arisen, must also find
a field to act in; and the "basis for action" (Karma-Sangraha)
is constituted of the "instruments," the "reaction" and the
"agent" (the actor). This "sense of agency" expressed by the
ego, can maintain itself only as long as it holds a vivid
picture of the "fruit of its action" which it wants to gain.
Fruit, meaning the profit or the gain that is intended to be
1225

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

gained by the action, is indicated here by the term 'work'
(Karma). According to Shri Shankaraacharya 'Karma' here
means the end.
When a desirer, the agent, encouraged by this constant
attraction towards a satisfying end, wants to achieve it, he
must necessarily have the instruments-of-action
(Karanam). These instruments include not only the organsof-perception-and-action, but also the inner equipments of
the mind and the intellect. It cannot be very difficult for a
student to understand that: (1) an AGENT having a desire,
(2) maintaining in his mind a clear picture of the END or
the goal, (3) with all the necessary instruments to act
thereupon, would be the sum total contents of any activity
(Karma-Sangraha). If any one of the above three items is
absent, action cannot take place. These three (Karanam,
Kartaa and Karma) are together designated as the parts of
the "Karma-assembly," the "basis of all Karma s" --- (KarmaSangraha).
Thus having roughly indicated in this stanza the threefold
"impulses of action" and the three-fold "basis for action,"
Krishna continues to explain in His Song why different
people act so differently under different impulses and
obey different basis in their actions. He divides each one
of them under the three categories of human nature: the
'good' (Sattwic), the 'passionate' (Rajasic), and the 'dull'
(Tamasic).

1226

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO SHOW THE THREEFOLD DISTINCTIONS IN EACH ONE OF THE ABOVE,
ACCORDING TO THE THREE PREDOMINANT
NATURES --- THE 'GOOD,' THE 'PASSIONATE' AND
THE 'DULL':
19. 'Knowledge, ' 'action, ' and 'actor' are declared in the
Science of Temperaments (gunas) to be of three kinds only,
according to the distinctions of temperaments; hear them also
duly.
As an introduction to what is to follow immediately, here
it is said that "knowledge," "action," and the "actor"
(agent), all the three because of the difference of the
temperament in the individuals, at the given time of
observation, fall under a three-fold division. This
classification is being exhaustively explained in the
following stanzas.
Guna is the preponderance of a given type of temperament
in one's inner nature. The human mind and intellect
function constantly, but they always come to function
under the different "climatic conditions" within our mind.
These varying climates of the mind are called the three
gunas: the 'good,' the 'passionate' and the 'dull.'
Under each of these temperaments the entire human
personality behaves differently, and, naturally therefore,
the permutations and combinations of the varieties make
1227

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

up the infinite types that are available in the world; even
within the biography of one and the same personality we
find different moods and behaviours at different periods
of time, depending entirely upon the occasion, the type of
the situation, the nature of the problem and the kind of
challenge the person is called upon to face.
According to the Science of the gunas, as enunciated in
Kapila's Saankhya Yoga, "Knowledge," "Action" and "Actor"
are each classified under these three categories. They are
being enumerated here and Krishna invites the students of
the Geeta to 'LISTEN ATTENTIVELY TO THEM.' It is
meaningless, in fact, to ask Arjuna to listen to the
discourses, because he was all the time listening to the
Lord. The implication must be that the teacher is attracting
the special attention of the student because of the
importance of the theme.
HERE FOLLOWS
"KNOWLEDGE":

THE

THREE-FOLD

TYPE

OF

20. That by which one sees the one indestructible reality in all
beings, undivided in the divided, know that "knowledge" as
SATTWIC (Pure) .
Inasmuch as the constituents of action, namely
"knowledge," "work," and the "ego," are under the
influences of different moods, each one of them can fall
into the three types. We fluctuate among these three gunas
1228

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

and the different proportions in which they are mixed in
our bosom determine the innumerable types of
individuals that we are.
These detailed descriptions of the different types of
"knowledge," "action" and "actor" are given here not for
the purpose of judging and classifying others, but for the
seeker to UNDERSTAND HIMSELF. A true student of
culture and self-development must try to maintain himself
as far as possible, in the Sattwic temperament. By selfanalysis, we can diagnose ourselves, and immediately
remedy the defects in us.
In this stanza, we have the description of the Sattwic type
of "knowledge." The "knowledge" by which the One
Imperishable Being is seen in all existence, is Sattwic.
Though the forms constituted by the different body-mindintellect equipments are all different in different living
creatures, the Sattwic "knowledge" recognises all of them
as the expressions of one and the same Truth, which is the
Essence in all of them.
Just as an electrical engineer recognises the SAME
electricity flowing through all the bulbs, a goldsmith
recognises the ONE metal 'gold' in all ornaments, and
every one of us is aware of the SAME cotton in all shirts,
so also, the intellect that sees the screen upon which the
play of life and the throbs of existence are projected as the
Changeless One has the "knowledge" that is Sattwic.
1229

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

UNDIVIDED IN THE DIVIDED (Avibhaktam Vibhakteshu) -- Even if there are a hundred different pots, of different
shapes and colour, and different sizes, the "space" is the
ONE undivided factor in all these different pots. Bulbs are
different but the current that is expressing through them
all is the ONE electricity. Waves are different, and yet the
SAME ocean is the reality and the substance in all the
waves.... Similarly, the one LIFE throbs in all, expressing
itself differently as Its different manifestations, because of
the different constitution in the matter-arrangements. The
"knowledge" that can recognise the play (vilasa) of this
One Principle of Consciousness in and through all the
different equipments, is fully Sattwic.
WHAT TYPE OF AN
"PASSIONATE" POSSESS?

INTELLECT

DOES

THE

21. But that "knowledge" which sees in all beings various
entities of distinct kinds, (and) as different from one another,
know that knowledge as RAJASIC (Passionate) .
After having found a description of the 'good,' we have
herein an equally complete description of the "knowledge"
that is 'passionate' (Rajasic).
The "knowledge" that recognises plurality, by reason of
separateness, is Rajasic in its texture. The "knowledge" of
the 'passionate,' ever restless in its energy, considers
various entities as different from one another; to the
1230

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Rajasic "knowledge," the world is an assortment of
innumerable types of different varieties; the intellect of
such a man perceives distinctions among the living
creatures, and divides them into different classes --- as the
animal, the vegetable and the human kingdoms --- as men
of different castes, creeds, races, nationalities etc.
WHAT THEN IS THE NATURE OF "KNOWLEDGE" OF
THE DULL?
22. But that "knowledge, " which clings to one single effect, as if
it were the whole, without reason, without foundation in truth
and narrow, that is declared to be TAMASIC (Dull) .
An intellect that has got fumed under the dulling effects of
extreme tamas clings to one single "effect" as though it
were the whole, never enquiring into its "cause." The
"knowledge" of the dull is painted here as that belonging
to the lowest type of spiritual seekers. They are generally
fanatic in their faith and in their devotion, in their views
and values in life. They never enquire into, and try to
discover, the cause of things and happenings; they are
unreasonable (ahaitukam).
Looking through such a confused intellect loaded with
fixed ideas, the dull not only fail to see things as they are,
but invariably project their own ideas upon the world and
judge it all wrongly. In fact, a man of Tamasic intellect
views the world as if it is meant for him and his pleasures
1231

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

alone. He totally ignores the Divine Presence, the Infinite
Consciousness. The "knowledge" of the dull is thus
circumscribed by its own concept of self-importance, and
thus its vision becomes narrow (alpam) and limited.
To summarise, the "knowledge" of the 'good' (Sattwic)
perceives the oneness underlying the universe; the
comprehension of the 'passionate' (Rajasic) recognises the
plurality of the world; and the understanding of the 'dull'
(Tamasic) indicates a highly crystallized, self-centred ego
in him, and his view of the world is always perverted and
ever false.
It must again be noted that in this chapter we shall come
across similar three-fold divisions in the various aspects of
our personal inner life and they are not meant to serve as
reckoners to classify OTHERS, but they are meant to help
us to SIZE OURSELVES UP from time to time.
THE THREE-FOLD NATURE OF "ACTION" IS NOW
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZAS:
23. An "action" which is ordained, which is free from
attachment, which is done without love or hatred, by one who is
not desirous of the fruit, that action is declared to be SATTWIC
(pure) .
Having so far explained the three types of "knowledge,"
Krishna now classifies "actions" (Karma) under the same
1232

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

three heads. A Sattwic "action" is the best, productive of
peace within and harmony without the field of activity,
and therefore, it is the purest of the three types of "action."
It is an obligatory action (Niyatam), a work that is
undertaken for the work's own sake, in an attitude that
work itself is worship. Such activities chasten the
personality and are ever performed in a spirit of
inspiration. Inspired activities naturally surpass the very
excellence the actor or the doer is ordinarily capable of.
Such an activity is always undertaken without any
attachment (Sanga-rahitam) and without any anxiety for
gaining any definite end. It is a dedicated activity of love,
and yet, it is not propelled by either love or hatred.
The missionary work undertaken by all prophets and
sages are examples in point. We too can recognise the
same type of work, which we unconsciously perform on
some rare occasions. A typical example that can at this
moment be remembered is an individual nursing his own
wounded limb. As soon as, say, your left toe strikes
against some furniture in the house and gets wounded,
the entire body bends down to nurse it. Herein, there is
neither any special love for the left leg nor any particular
extra attachment for it, as compared with other parts of
the body. To an individual the whole body is himself, and
all parts are equally important; he pervades his whole
body.
In the same fashion, an individual with a Sattwic intellect
that has recognised the All-pervading One, lives in the
1233

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Consciousness of the One Reality that permeates the
whole universe, and therefore, to him the leper and the
prince, the sick and the healthy, the rich and the poor are
so many different parts of his own spiritual personality
only. Such an individual serves the world in a sense of
self-fulfilment and inspired joy.
Summarising, a Sattwic Karma is a humane action,
performed without any attachment, and not motivated
either by likes (Raga) or dislikes (Dvesha), and undertaken
without any desire to enjoy the results thereof. The
"action" itself is its fulfilment; a Sattwic man acts, because
to remain without doing service is a choking death to him.
Such a man of Sattwic "action" alone is a true Brahmana.
WHAT IS RAJASIC ACTION?
24. But that "action" which is done by one, longing for desires,
or gain, done with egoism, or with much effort, is declared to be
RAJASIC (Passionate) .
The "action" of the 'passionate' (Rajasic) is that which is
undertaken to win one's desires with an extremely
insistent "I-act" mentality. Always such undertakings are
works of heavy toil involving great strain, and all the
consequent physical fatigue and mental exhaustion. The
individual is impelled to act and struggle by a welldefined and extremely arrogant ego-sense. He works,
generally under tension and strain, since he comes to
1234

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

believe that he alone can perform it and nobody else will
ever help him. All the time he is exhausted with his own
anxieties and fears at the thought whether his goal will
ever be achieved, if at all. When an individual works thus
with an arrogant ego, and with all its self-centredness, he
becomes restless enough to make himself totally
exhausted and completely shattered. Such "actions"
belong to the category of the passionate (Rajasic).
All activities of political leaders, social workers, great
industrialists, over-anxious parents, fanatic preachers,
proselytising missionaries and blind money-makers, when
they are at their best, are examples of this type.
THE CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF ACTIONS OF
THE "DULL TYPE" ARE DESCRIBED HEREUNDER:
25. That "action" which is undertaken from delusion, without
regard for the consequence, loss, injury, and ability, is declared
to be TAMASIC (dull) .
The "actions" (Karma) of the 'dull' type (Tamasic) are
performed without any consideration for the
consequences thereof, without any regard for their loss of
power or vitality. Such actors never care for the loss or
injury caused to others by their actions, nor do they pay
any attention to their own status and ability, when they
act. All such careless and irresponsible "actions" (Karma s)
undertaken merely because of some delusory
1235

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

misconception of the goal, fall under the Tamasic type.
Habits of drinking, reckless gambling, corruption, etc., are
all examples of the dull (Tamasic) "actions."
Such people have no regard for the consequences of their
actions. Ere long, they lose their vitality, and injure all
those who are depending upon them. They surrender
their dignity and status, their capacities and subtle
faculties --- all for the sake of their pursuit of a certain
delusory goal in life. All they demand is a temporary joy
of some sense gratification and a tickling satisfaction of
some fancy of the hour.
"Actions" of this type (Tamasic) immediately provide the
performer with a substantial dividend of sorrow. Rajasic
"action" comparatively takes a longer time to bring its
quota of disappointments and sorrows, while Sattwic
"action" is always steady and blissful.
THE THREE KINDS OF 'DOERS' (ACTORS) ARE
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA:
26. An "agent" who is free from attachment, non-egoistic,
endowed with firmness and enthusiasm, and unaffected by
success or failure, is called SATTWIC (pure) .
So far we have a description of the three types of
"Knowledge" and "Action." The third of the constituents
that goes into the make-up of an action is the "Doer," the
1236

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ego that has the desire to do. Since the three gunas come to
influence the psychological life and the intellectual
perception of all of us, the doer-personality in each one of
us must also change its moods and temperaments
according to the preponderant guna that rules the bosom
at any given moment of time. Consequently, the "ego" also
is classified under three kinds. With this stanza starts the
discussion on the three types of "actors" (Kartaa) who act
in the world outside.
A Sattwic "Actor" is the one who is free from attachment to
any of his kith and kin (Mukta-sangah), and non-egoistic
(Anaham vaadin). He is one who has no clinging
attachment to the things and beings around, as he has no
such false belief that the world outside will bring to him a
desirable fulfilment of his existence. He sincerely feels that
he has not done anything spectacular even when he has
actually done the greatest good to mankind, because he
surrenders his ego-centric individuality to the Lord,
through his perfect attunement with the Infinite.
When such an individual --- who has destroyed in himself
his ego-sense and the consequent sense of attachment --works in the worldly fields of activities, he ever acts with
firm resolution (Dhriti), and extreme zeal (Utsaha). The
term 'Dhriti' means "fortitude" --- the subtle faculty in man
that makes him strive continuously towards a determined
goal. When obstacles come his way, it is this faculty of
'Dhriti' that discovers for him more and more courage and
enthusiasm to face them all, and to continue striving
1237

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

towards the same determined goal. This persevering
tendency to push oneself on with the work until one
reaches the halls of success, unmindful of the obstacles
one might meet with on the path, is called 'Dhriti'; and
'Utsaha' means untiring self-application with dynamic
enthusiasm on the path of achievement, while pursuing
success.
Lastly, a Sattwic "actor" is one who ever strives
unperturbed, both in success and in failure, both in
pleasure and in pain. At this moment I can only think of
one example of this type of "actor" (Kartaa): the nurse in
the hospital. She has generally no attachment to the
patient; she has no ego that she is curing the patient,
because she knows that there is the ability of the doctor
behind every successful cure. She has fortitude (Dhriti)
and enthusiasm (Utsaha) --- or else she will not be able to
continue efficiently in her job. And lastly, she is not
concerned with success or failure; she does not rejoice
when a patient walks out fully cured, nor does she moan
for every patient that dies. She cannot afford such an
indulgence. She understands the hospital to be an island
of success and failure, of births and deaths, and she is
there only to serve.
An "actor" (or agent) of the above type is one who suffers
the least dissipation of his energies, and so he successfully
manages to bring into the field of his actions the mighty
total possibilities of a fully unfolded human personality.
The Sattwic "agent" strives joyously in Sattwic "actions,"
1238

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

guided by his Sattwic "knowledge"; his is the most
enduring success, and the world of beings is benefited the
most by the inexhaustible rewards of the love-labour of
such prophets.
A Sattwic Kartaa realises that in all his actions, his body,
mind and intellect come into play and serve the world
only because the Spirit, the Infinite, is in contact with
them. The equipments of matter are as helpless as a
broomstick left in a corner. Whenever the body functions,
the mind-intellect-equipment throbs and heaves in its
pursuit of the new ideals and achievements. And this is
because of the Life which thrills them into their respective
expressions.
The faculties of the intellect, the beauties of the heart, the
vitality of the body, are all vehicles for the Sacred Will of
the Spirit to sing through. If the vehicles are not properly
disciplined, and if they do not come to surrender totally to
the Infinite, the Lord, they get broken and shattered.
A Sattwic "doer" is one who is ever conscious of the touch
of the Infinite Light in all his activities.
WHO IS THE RAJASIC "DOER"?
27. Passionate, desiring to gain the fruits-of-actions, greedy,
harmful, impure, full of delight and grief, such an "agent" is
said to be RAJASIC (passionate) .
1239

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

A "doer" belonging to the PASSIONATE type is being
exhaustively painted here. He is full of desires, passions
and attachments, and he tenaciously clings on to some
wished-for gain or goal. He is swayed by passion (raaga)
and eagerly seeks the fruit of his work. He is ever greedy
(Lubdhah) in the sense that such a Rajasic "doer" is never
satisfied with what he gains and greedily thirsts for more.
His thirst is insatiable because his desires multiply from
moment to moment.
When a man, full of desires and passions, works with
mounting greed, he naturally becomes very malignant
(Himsaatmakah) in his programmes of pursuit. He never
hesitates to injure another, if such injury were to win his
end. He is blind to the amount of sorrow he might bring to
others; he is concerned only with the realisation of his
ulterior motives. When a man of this type (with the above
qualities) becomes maliciously resolved to gain his own
ends, it is but natural that he becomes impure (Ashuchih),
meaning "immoral."
Even unrighteous methods and vulgar immoralities are no
ban to such a "doer" and he will pursue them, if his
particular desire can be fulfilled thereby. He may
ordinarily be quite a moral and righteous man, but the
beauty of his composure and the steadiness of his
morality, expressed during his quieter moments, all fly
away as brilliant splinters when the sledge hammer of his
greed and passion, vengeful plans and malignant
schemes, thuds upon his heart.
1240

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is but natural that such a PASSIONATE "doer," when he
acts in his blinding desires, comes to live, all through his
embodied existence, a sad life of agitations, moved by joys
and sorrows, "full of delight and grief," (Harsha-ShokaAnvitah). This completes the picture of a man who is a
'passionate' (Rajasic) "doer."
AND HOW DOES A TAMASIC "DOER" FUNCTION IN
THE FIELD OF ACTIVITY?
28. Unsteady, vulgar, unbending, cheating, malicious, lazy,
despondent, and procrastinating, such an "agent" is said to be
TAMASIC (Dull) .
Here we have a description of a Tamasic "doer" pursuing
his work motivated by his Tamasic "knowledge" and
expressing himself through his Tamasic "actions."
UNCONTROLLED (Ayuktah) --- A "doer" who has no
control over himself, and therefore, is ever unsteady in his
application, is of the Tamasic type. He becomes
unbalanced in his activities, because his mind does not
obey the warnings of his intellect. A yukta-mind is one
which is obedient to and perfectly under the control of the
intellect. A tamasic man is uncultured inasmuch as he acts
in the world, spurred by the impulses and instincts of his
own mind. The glory of a cultured man comes out only
when he brings the impulsive storms of his mind under
the chastening control and intelligent guidance of his
1241

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

intellect. He is Ayuktah who behaves with no control over
his own animal impulses and low instincts. When such an
individual acts in the world, he cannot but behave as a
vulgar man (Praakrita).
If shown an intellectual mirror, he will never admit the
reflected vulgarities as his own, nor will he acknowledge
his way of living as base and licentious. He is arrogant
and obstinate (Stabdhah) and in his stubborn nature he will
not lend himself to be persuaded to act more honourably.
DISHONEST (Shathah) --- He becomes dishonest. He
becomes extremely deceitful. Herein the dishonesty, or
deceitfulness, arises out of his incapacity to see any pointof-view other than the false conclusions he has arrived at.
Such an individual is not a dependable character, for he
conceals his real motives and purposes and secretly works
out his programmes which generally bring about a lot of
sorrow to all around him.
MALICIOUS (Naishkritikah) --- The term describes,
according to Shankara, one who is bent upon creating
quarrels and disputes among people. With a vengefulness,
such a person pursues his adversary to destroy him.
INDOLENT (Alasah) --- The "dull doer" is a very indolent
man spending his time in over-indulgence. He is an idler,
for he avoids all creative endeavours and productive
efforts, if by deceit or cunning, he can easily and readily
procure enjoyable chances and pleasure-goods. He
1242

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

pursues such a path, however immoral it may be. He is a
social parasite; he enjoys and consumes without striving
and producing. He puts forth no effort; drowsiness of
intellect that renders him incapable of correct thinking is a
typical feature. The three brothers, from Lanka, in fact,
represent these three types of "doers." Of them,
Kumbhakarna, who sleeps six months and wakes up only
to spend the rest of the six months in eating, is symbolic of
a Tamasic "doer."
DESPONDENT (Vishaadi) --- He is one who will not meet
the challenge of life squarely. He has neither the vitality
nor the stamina to stand up against the challenges of life.
This is because his over-indulgent nature has sapped up
all his vitality and courage to meet life. Invariably, he
spends his time complaining of men and things around
him and wishes for a secure spot in the world, where he
can be away from all obstacles so that he may peacefully
continue satisfying his endless thirst for sensuous
enjoyments.
PROCRASTINATER (Deergha-sootree) --- An individual so
benumbed in his inner nature, slowly gathers within
himself an incapacity to arrive at any firm judgement.
Even if he comes to any vague decision, he has not the will
to continue the consistent pursuit of his judgement.
Indolent as he is by nature, more often than not, he
postpones the right until it is too late. This procrastinating
tendency is natural to a Tamasic "actor." The term deerghasootree has been interpreted by some commentators as
1243

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"harbouring deep and long (deergha) vengeance against
others (sootra)," which is also not inappropriate in the
context of the thought development in this stanza.
Thus, one who is unsteady, vulgar, arrogant, deceitful,
malicious, indolent, despondent and procrastinating,
belongs to the 'dullest' type of "agents" available in the
fields of human endeavour. This and the two preceding
stanzas provide us with three beautifully framed mental
pictures, bringing out in all details the Sattwic, the Rajasic
and the Tamasic types of "doers" available in the world. As
we have already emphasised these pictures are NOT
yardsticks to classify OTHERS, but are meant for the
seekers to observe themselves. Whenever a true seeker
discovers symptoms of Tamas and Rajas growing in him
he should take notice of them at once and consciously
strive to regain his Sattwic beauty.
ACCORDING TO THE PREDOMINATING GUNA,
"UNDERSTANDING" AND "FORTITUDE" ALSO CAN
FALL UNDER A THREE-FOLD CLASSIFICATION --SAYS KRISHNA:
29. Hear (you) the three-fold division of "understanding" and
"fortitude" (made) according to the qualities, as I declare them
fully and severally, O Dhananjaya.
'Work,' no doubt, is constituted of the three factors: the
"knowledge," the "action" and the "actor." Each of these
1244

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

three factors was shown to fall under a three-fold
classification and all these classifications were described in
the foregoing NINE STANZAS. When an actor, guided by
his knowledge, acts in the world, no doubt, manifestation
of work takes place. But underlying these three, are TWO
FACTORS which supply the fuel and the motive force in
all sustained endeavours. They are "understanding"
(Buddhi) and "fortitude" (Dhriti).
Buddhi, or "understanding," means "the intellectual
capacity in the individual to grasp what is happening
around him." "Fortitude" (Dhriti) is "the faculty of
constantly keeping one idea in the mind and consistently
working it out to its logical end"; consistency of purpose
and self-application, without allowing oneself to be tossed
about hither and thither like a dry leaf at the mercy of a
fickle breeze, is called "fortitude."
Every action is controlled and guided by our intellectual
capacity of "understanding," and faithful consistency of
purpose, "fortitude." This stanza is an introduction to a
scientific discussion of these two faculties (Buddhi and
Dhriti) and their three-fold classification.
WHAT IS SATTWIC UNDERSTANDING?
30. That which knows the paths of work and renunciation, what
ought to be done and what ought not to be done, fear and
1245

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

fearlessness, bondage and liberation, that "understanding" is
SATTWIC (pure) , O Partha.
The intellect may be considered as having the best type of
"understanding" if it can readily discriminate among
beings and situations in its field of activity. The intellect
has various functions --- observing, analysing, classifying,
willing, wishing, remembering and a host of others --- and
yet, we find that the one faculty essential in all of them is
the "power of discrimination." Without 'discrimination,'
neither
observation
nor
classification,
neither
understanding nor judgement, is ever possible.
Essentially, therefore, the function of the intellect is
"discrimination," which is otherwise called the faculty of
"right understanding."
An "understanding" (Buddhi) which is capable of clearly
discriminating between the RIGHT field of pursuit and
the WRONG field of false proposition, is the highest type
of "understanding." The individual must have the nerve to
pursue the right path and also the heroism to defect from
all wrong fields of futile endeavour. In short, true
"understanding" has a ready ability to discriminate
between actions that are to be pursued (Pravritti) and
actions that are to be shunned (Nivritti).
An intellect that can discriminate between the true and the
false types of work must also be able to function in
judging correctly "WHAT IS RIGHT AND WHAT IS
WRONG." Every moment, we are called upon to decide
1246

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

what responses should be made to the flux of happenings
and challenges that continuously take place around us. A
Sattwic Buddhi always helps us to arrive at the correct
judgement. A person in a mood of anger or with a
wounded vanity, suddenly resigns his job only to regret
thereafter, the folly of his action. His capacity to judge
rightly was mutilated by his bad temper of the moment, or
by his exaggerated vanity, and so he comes to regret.
Arjuna himself had come to a state of mental hysteria
when he complained that this power of judgement had
been lost, mainly because of his inordinate attachment to
his kith and kin.
WHAT IS TO BE FEARED AND WHAT IS NOT TO BE
FEARED (Bhaya-abhaya) --- "Fools rush in where angels
fear to tread." Men of indiscrimination, in their false
evaluation of the sense-world, hug on to delusory objects
and things, fearing nothing from them, and yet, they fear
to read and understand philosophy, to strive and to
experience the Infinite. A true intellect must have the right
"understanding" to discriminate between what is to be
feared and what is not to be feared.
BONDAGE AND LIBERATION (Bandham-Moksham-cha) -- If the "understanding" is clear, we can easily recognise
the tendencies in our make-up that entangle the Higher in
us, and curtail its fuller play. To observe and analyse
ourselves with the required detachment, and to evaluate
critically our psychological behaviours and intellectual
attitudes in life is not easy; it is possible only for those
1247

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

who are endowed with a well-cultivated Sattwic
"understanding." If we cultivate Sattwic "understanding,"
it can not only diagnose for us the false values and wrong
emotions that work in us, but also intuitively discover the
processes of unwinding ourselves from these cruel
vasanas, and help us to regain our personality-freedom
from these subjective entanglements.
To summarise: the Sattwic Buddhi is defined as one which
makes known to us what type of work is to be done, and
what type of work is to be renounced, which distinguishes
the right from the wrong, which knows what is to be
feared and what is to be faced fearlessly, which shows us
the causes of our own present ugliness in life and explains
to us the remedies for the same.
Proper "understanding" can make a garden in a desert,
can churn out pure success from every threat of failure.
Without "understanding" and "fortitude," even the best of
chances will become utter disaster. Right "understanding"
can convert the greatest of tragedies into chances for
ushering in a prosperous destiny.
WHAT IS RAJASIC UNDERSTANDING?
31. That by which one wrongly understands DHARMA and
ADHARMA and also what ought to be done and what ought
not to be done, that intellect (understanding) , O Partha, is
RAJASIC (passionate) .
1248

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The "understanding" of the passionate (Rajasic) comes to
judge the righteous (Dharma) and the unrighteous
(Adharma), what is to be done and what is not to be done,
in a slightly perverted manner (Ayathaavat). Such a Rajasic
"understanding" cannot reach right judgements, because it
is invariably coloured by its own preconceived notions
and powerful likes and dislikes.
WHAT IS TAMASIC "UNDERSTANDING"?
32. That which, enveloped in darkness, sees ADHARMA as
DHARMA, and all things perverted, that intellect
(understanding) , O Partha, is TAMASIC (dull) .
The type of "understanding" which brings sorrow to
everyone including the individual himself, is the
"understanding" of the 'dull' (Tamasic). Actually it is no
"understanding" at all; it can, at best, be called only a
chronic bundle of misunderstandings. Such an intellect
runs into its own conclusions, but unfortunately, it always
lands up with wrong conclusions only. It has such a
totally perverted "understanding" that it recognises "Adharma" as "Dharma," the 'right' as 'wrong.' This faculty of
coming to wrong judgements is amply seen in the dull,
because their entire reasoning capacity is enveloped by
complete darkness and egoistic drunkenness.
DISCUSSING THE THREE TYPES OF "FORTITUDE,"
LORD KRISHNA CONTINUES:
1249

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

33. The unwavering "fortitude" by which, through YOGA, the
functions of the mind, the PRANA and the senses are
restrained, that "fortitude, " O Partha, is SATTWIC (pure) .
In this section of three stanzas we get a description of the
three types of "fortitude" (Dhriti).
Dhriti is that power within ourselves by which we
constantly see the goal we want to achieve, and while
striving towards it, Dhriti discovers for us the necessary
constancy of purpose to pursue the path, in spite of all the
mounting obstacles that rise on the way. Dhriti paints the
idea, maintains it constantly in our vision, makes us
steadily strive towards it, and when obstacles come, Dhriti
mobilises secret powers within us to face them all
courageously, heroically, and steadily. We shall use the
term "fortitude" to indicate all the above-mentioned
suggestions implied in the term Dhriti.
This secret fire in man that makes him glow in life and
rockets him to spectacular achievements is not generally
found in those who have no control over themselves and
are voluptuously indulging in sensuous fields. A
dissipated individual, who has drained off his energy
through wrong-thinking and false-living, shall discover no
Dhriti in himself. The subtle faculty of "fortitude" is being
analysed and classified here, under the three main heads:
the 'good' (Sattwic), the 'passionate' (Rajasic) and the 'dull'
(Tamasic). But in all of them, it is interesting to note, Dhriti
1250

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

stands for "the constancy of purpose" with which every
individual pursues his field of endeavour chosen for him,
with his own "understanding" (Buddhi).
The constancy with which one steadily controls one's
mind and sense-organs and their activities, through
single-pointed attention and faithful concentration upon a
given point-of-contemplation, is the Dhriti of the Sattwic
type.
Mind alone can control the organs-of-action (KarmaIndriyas) and the organs-of-perception (Jnana-Indriyas). To
dissuade the organs-of-action and perception from their
false pursuits of the ephemeral joys and the consequent
dissipations, the mind must have some fixed source to
draw its energies and satisfactions from. Without fixing
the mind upon something nobler and higher, we cannot
detach it from its present pursuits. Therefore, Krishna
insists that Yoga is unavoidable.
With faithful contemplation upon the Self, the mind gains
in steadiness and equipoise, peace and satisfaction, and
therefore, it develops a capacity to rule over the senseorgans. But all these achievements are possible only when
the inward personality can constantly supply a steady
stream of Dhriti. Constancy in endeavour and consistency
of purpose or "fortitude" that is expressed in any field of
activity, becomes Sattwic Dhriti when constituted as
described above.
1251

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHAT IS RAJASIC 'Dhriti'?
34. But the "fortitude, " O Arjuna, by which one holds fast to
duty, pleasure and wealth, from attachment and craving for the
fruits-of-actions, that "fortitude, " O Partha, is RAJASIC
(passionate) .
The constancy with which a person holds fast to duty
(Dharma), wealth (Artha) and pleasure (Kama), encouraged
by his growing desire to enjoy the fruit of each of them, is
the steadiness or "fortitude" of the Rajasic type. It is
interesting to note that in the enumeration Krishna avoids
Moksha and only takes the first three of the "four ends of
man" (Purushaartha), for, a Rajasic man is satisfied with the
other fields of self-effort and has no demand for spiritual
liberation.
The constancy of pursuit of such an individual will be in
these three fields of duty, wealth and pleasure, and he will
be pursuing one or the other of them with an extreme
desire to enjoy the resultant satisfactions. He follows
Dharma, only to gain the heavens; he pursues Artha so that
he may have power in this life; and he pursues Kaama
with a firm belief and faith that sensuous objects can give
him all satisfactions in life.
The steadiness with which one with such an
"understanding" would strive and work in these fields is
classified as Rajasic Dhriti.
1252

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

WHAT IS TAMASIC DHRITI?
35. The 'constancy' because of which a stupid man does not
abandon sleep, fear, grief, depression, and also arrogance
(conceit) , that "fortitude, " O Partha, is TAMASIC (dull) .
In this stanza we have the description of the dull type of
"fortitude," and it is not very difficult to understand it
because a substantial majority of us belong to this type!
The steadiness-of-purpose with which one DOES NOT
give up one's dreams and imaginations, fears and
agitations, griefs and sorrows, depressions and arrogance,
is the Dhriti of the Tamasic type.
The term dream (Swapna) is used here to indicate fancied
imaginations thrown up by a mind that is ALMOST
drowned in sleep. To see things which are not there but
are delusorily projected by one's own fancy, is called a
dream. The dull personalities project upon the world of
objects a dream-like value of reality and false joy, and then
laboriously strive to gain them.
FEAR (Bhaya) --- Such men of delusion will have many a
fancied fear of the future, which, of course, may never
come to pass, but it can efficiently destroy the equilibrium
and balance, poise and peace in the individual's life. There
are many among us who have experienced such fears by
the hundred in the past. Some fear that they are going to
die, but each following day a healthy man wakes up to
1253

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

face the world! Psychologically, they are victims of a fearcomplex. And it is interesting to note with what great
tenacity these men hug on to such complexes.
GRIEF, DEPRESSION AND ARROGANCE (Shokam,
Vishaadam, Madam) --- These again are great channels
through which human vitality gets dissipated. A man of
extreme 'dullness' will constantly keep these three within
his bosom and thereby suffer a sense of self-depletion and
inner exhaustion. "Grief" (Shokam) is, in general, the
painful feeling of disappointment at something that has
already happened in the PAST; while "depression"
(Vishaadam) generally reaches our bosom as a result of our
despair regarding the FUTURE; and "arrogance" (Madam)
is the sense of lusty conceit with which a foolish man lives
his immoral, low life in the PRESENT.
He who follows these five values of life is called by
Krishna a fool (Durmedhaa), and the constancy with which
such a fool follows his life of dreams and fears, griefs and
despondencies, arrogance and passion, is indicated as the
Dhriti of the Tamasic type.
"PLEASURE" ALSO IS THREE-FOLD ACCORDING TO
THE PREDOMINANT "GUNA" IN THE INDIVIDUAL;
HERE FOLLOWS THE THREE-FOLD DIVISION OF
"PLEASURE," WHICH IS THE EFFECT OF "ACTION":

1254

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

36. And now hear from me, O best among the Bharatas, of the
three-fold "pleasure, " in which one rejoices by practice, and
surely comes to the end-of-pain.
In the logical thought development in this chapter,
hitherto we found the three factors that constitute the
"impulse of all actions": (1) the knowledge, (2) the actor
and (3) the action. Afterwards, the very motive forces in
all activity --- which not only propel activity, but
intelligently control and direct it --- the Buddhi and the
Dhriti, have also been shown severally, in their different
types.
Every "actor" acts in his field, guided by his "knowledge,"
ruled by his "understanding" (Buddhi), and maintained by
his "fortitude" (Dhriti). The dissection and observation of
"work" is now complete since we have understood the
"anatomy and physiology" of work. The "Psychology" of
work is now being discussed: why does man act? In fact,
every living creature acts propelled by the same instinct,
namely, the craving for happiness.
With the three constituents of action --- namely,
"knowledge," "agency" and "action" --- helped by the right
type of "understanding" (Buddhi) and "fortitude" (Dhriti),
every living creature from the womb to the tomb
continues acting in the world. To what purpose? Everyone
acts for the same goal of gaining happiness, meaning, a
better sense of fulfilment.
1255

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

And though the goal be thus one and the same (viz.,
happiness), since different types of constituents go into
the make-up of our actions, and since we are so different
in the texture of our UNDERSTANDING and
FORTITUDE, the path adopted by each one of us is
distinctly different from those adopted by all others. In
and through the variety of actions in the universe, all
people --- the good, the passionate, and the dull --- seek
their own sense of satisfaction.
Since each of the five component parts that make up an
"action" is of the three different types, it follows that
"happiness" that is gained by the different types must also
be different in its texture, perfection and completeness.
Here follows a description of the three types of
"happiness."
THROUGH PRACTICE (Abhyaasat) --- Through a
familiarity of this complete scheme-of-things within, an
individual can, to a large extent, come to diagnose himself
and understand the why and the wherefore of all his
miseries. He can thus learn to readjust and re-evaluate his
life and thereby come to end his sorrows totally, or at
least, alleviate them to some extent.
WHAT IS SATTWIC (PURE) "HAPPINESS"?

1256

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

37. That which is like poison at first, but in the end like nectar,
that "pleasure" is declared to be SATTWIC (pure) , born of the
purity of one's own mind, due to Self realisation.
That "happiness" which, in the beginning, is like poison
and very painful, but which, when it works itself out,
fulfils itself in a nectarine success, is the enduring
"happiness" of the 'good' (Sattwic). In short, "happiness"
that arises from constant effort is the "happiness" that can
yield us a greater beauty and a larger sense of fulfilment.
The flimsy "happiness" that is gained through senseindulgence and sense-gratification is a joy that is fleeting,
and after its onslaught there is a terrific under-current that
comes to upset our equilibrium and drag us into the
depths of despondency.
The joy arising out of inner self-control and the
consequent sense of self-perfection is no cheap
gratification. In the beginning its practice is certainly very
painful and extremely arduous. But one who has
discovered in oneself the necessary courage and heroism
to walk the precipitous "path" of self-purification and
inward balance, comes to enjoy the subtlest of happiness
and the all-fulfilling sense of inward peace. This
"happiness" (Sukham), arising out of self-control and selfdiscipline, is classified here by the Lord as Sattwic
"happiness."
BORN OUT OF THE PURITY OF ONE'S OWN MIND
(Atma Buddhi Prasaada-jam) --- By carefully living the life of
1257

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the 'good' (Sattwic) and acting in disciplined self-control,
as far as possible in the world, maintaining the Sattwic
qualities in all their "component parts," one can develop
the 'Prasaada' of one's inner nature. The term 'Prasaada' is
very often misunderstood in ritualistic language.
The peace and tranquillity, the joy and expansion, that the
mind and intellect come to experience as a result of their
discipline and contemplation are the true "Prasaada." The
joy arising out of spiritual practices, provided by the
integration of the inner nature, is called 'Prasada' which is
the Sattwic "happiness," Prasaada-jam. In short, the sense of
fulfilment and the gladness of heart that well up in the
bosom of a cultured man, as a result of his balanced and
self-disciplined life of high ideals and divine values of life,
are the enduring "happiness" of all Men-of-Perfection, of
all true men of religion.
WHAT IS RAJASIC (PASSIONATE) "HAPPINESS"?
38. That pleasure which arises from the contact of the senseorgans with the objects, (which is) at first like nectar, (but is) in
the end like poison, that is declared to be RAJASIC (passionate)
.
That happiness which arises in our bosom when the
appropriate world-of-objects comes in contact with our
sense-organs is indeed a thrill that is nectarine in the
beginning, but unfortunately, it vanishes as quickly as it
1258

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

comes, dumping the enjoyer into a pit of exhaustion and
indeed into a sense of ill-reputed dissipation.
Rajasic "happiness" arises only when the sense-organs are
actually in contact with the sense-objects. Unfortunately,
this contact cannot be permanently established; for the
objects are always variable. And the subjective mind and
intellect, the instruments that come in contact with the
objects, are also variable and changing. The sense-organs
cannot afford to embrace the sense-objects at all times
with the same appetite, and even if they do so, the very
object in the embrace of the sense-organs withers and
putrefies, raising the stink of death. No man can FULLY
enjoy even the passing glitter of joy that the sense-organs
give him, for even at the moment of enjoyment the joypossibility in it gets unfortunately tainted by an anxiety
that it may leave him. Thus, to a true thinker, the
temporary joys of sense-objects are not at all satisfactory,
since they bury the enjoyer, ere long, in a tomb of sorrow.
This sort of "happiness" is classified as the Rajasic type of
"happiness" and is generally pursued by men of passion.
WHAT IS TAMASIC (DULL) "HAPPINESS"?
39. The pleasure, which at first and in the sequel deludes the
Self, arising from sleep, indolence and heedlessness, is declared
to be TAMASIC (Dull) .
1259

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The "happiness" of the 'dull' (Tamasic) is that which
deludes the Higher in us, and vitiates the culture in us;
and, when the pursuit of such "happiness" is continued for
a length of time, it gives to the intellect a thick crust of
wrong values and false ideals, and ruins the spiritual
sensitivity of the personality.
This type of Tamasic "happiness" satisfies mere sensecravings; for such Tamasic "happiness" arises, according to
the Lord, from sleep (Nidraa), indolence (Aalasya) and
heedlessness (Pramaada).
SLEEP (Nidraa) --- It is not the psychological condition of
the everyday sleep that is meant here. Philosophically, the
term "sleep" stands for "the non-apprehension of Reality,"
and the incapacity of the dull-witted to perceive any
permanent, ever-existing goal of life. This encourages one
to seek simple sense-gratifications at the flesh level.
INDOLENCE (Aalasya) --- It is the incapacity of the
intellect to think out correctly the problems that face it and
come to correct judgement. Such an inertia of the intellect
makes it insensitive to the inspiring song of life, and a
person having such an intellect is generally tossed here
and there by the passing tides of his own instincts and
impulses.
HEEDLESSNESS (Pramaada) --- As every challenge
reaches us and demands our response to it, no doubt, the
Higher in us truly guides our activities; but the lower,
1260

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

indolent mind seeks a compromise and tries to act,
heedless of the voice of the Higher. When an individual
has thus lived for some time carelessly ignoring the Voice
of the Higher, he becomes more and more removed from
his divine perfections. He sinks lower and lower into his
animal nature.
When such an individual, who is heedless of the higher
calls, indolent at his intellectual level and completely
asleep to the existence and the play of Reality, seeks
"happiness," he only seeks a "happiness" that deludes the
soul, both at the beginning and at the end. Such
"happiness" is here classified by Krishna as "dull"
(Tamasic).
HERE FOLLOWS A STANZA WHICH CONCLUDES
THE SUBJECT OF OUR PRESENT DISCUSSION:
40. There is no being on earth, or again in heaven among the
"DEVAS" (heavenly beings) , who is totally liberated from the
three qualities, born of PRAKRITI (matter) .
With the above stanza the exhaustive description of the
three Gunas as impinging upon the personality of all
living organisms, is concluded. On the whole, this section
of the chapter has given us a psychological explanation for
the variety of men that we meet with, in the world-ofplurality, not only in their personality-structures but also
in their individual-behaviours. The three types of beings
1261

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

have been described exhaustively --- by an analysis of
"knowledge," "action," "agent," "understanding" and
"fortitude." This is only for our guidance so that we know
where we stand in our own inner nature and outer
manifestations.
If we detect, with the above-mentioned slide-rule of
personality, that we belong to the Tamasic or the Rajasic
types, we, as seekers of cultural expression and growth,
are to take warning and strive to heave ourselves into the
Sattwic state. Remember, and I repeat, REMEMBER, these
classifications are given NOT TO CLASSIFY OTHERS but
to provide us with a ready-reckoner to help us in our
constant and daily self-analysis and self-discipline.
These three gunas have been described because there is no
living organism in the world, "NO CREATURE EITHER
ON EARTH OR AGAIN AMONG THE GODS IN
HEAVEN," who is totally free from the influence of these
three gunas; no living creature can act or work beyond the
frontiers provided by these three gunas. Nature (Prakriti)
itself is constituted of these gunas; the play of these three
gunas is the very expression of Prakriti.
But at the same time, no two creatures react to the world
outside in the same fashion, because the proportion in
which these three gunas come to influence each one is
different at different times. These three gunas put together
are the manifestation of "Maya." Individuals differ from
one another because of the different textures of the gunas
1262

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

that predominantly rule over them; it is this Maya that
gives them their individuality. An individual cannot, at
any time, exist without all these three gunas, whatever be
their relative proportion.
No sample of "coffee" is possible without its three
ingredients, the decoction, the milk, and the sugar; but at
the same time, the proportion in which they are mixed
together may be different from cup to cup according to the
taste of the partaker. He who has transcended the three
gunas comes to experience the very plurality in the world
as the play of the One Infinite. So, let us introspect and
evaluate ourselves every day, every minute. Let us avoid
the lower gunas and steadily work ourselves up towards
the achievement of the Sattwic state. Only after reaching
the status of the good (Sattwic) can we be ushered into the
State of Godhood --- Perfection Absolute.
With these three measuring rods --- the qualities (gunas)
Krishna classifies the entire community of man under
three distinct types. The criterion of this classification is
the texture of man's inner equipments which he brings
into play for his achievements in his fields of activity.
Accordingly, the Hindu scriptures have brought the entire
humanity under a four-fold classification. So, its
applicability is not merely confined to India --- BUT IS
UNIVERSAL.
Certain well-defined characteristics determine the types of
these four classes of human beings; they are not always
1263

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

determined by heredity, or accident of birth. They are
termed, in our society, as: the Brahmanas --- with a major
portion of Sattwa, a little Rajas and with minimum Tamas;
the Kshatriyas --- mostly Rajas with some Sattwa, and a
dash of Tamas; the Vaishyas --- with more Rajas, less Sattwa
and some Tamas; and the Shudras --- mostly Tamas, a little
Rajas, with only a suspicion of Sattwa.
This four-fold classification is universal and for all times.
Even today it holds good. In modern language, the four
types of people may be called: (1) the creative thinkers; (2)
the politicians; (3) the commercial employers; and (4) the
labourers (the proletarians). We can easily recognise how
each subsequent classification holds in awe and reverence
the previous higher class --- the employees are afraid of
the employer, the commercial men are suspicious of the
politicians and the politicians tremble at the courageous,
independent thinkers.
In the following stanzas, by the discussions contained in
them, in the immediate context of the Krishna-Arjuna
summit talks, the Lord is only trying to make Arjuna
understand that his inner equipment is such that he can be
classified only as a Kshatriya. Being a Kshatriya, his duty is
to fight, championing the cause of the good, and thus
establish righteousness. He cannot, with profit, retire to
the jungle and meditate for self-unfoldment, since he will
have to grow, first of all, into the status of the Sattwic
personality (Brahmana) before he can successfully strive on
the path of total retirement and a life of rewarding
1264

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

contemplation. Therefore, with the available texture of
mind and intellect, the only spiritual Sadhana left for
Arjuna is to act vigorously in the field of contention.
Thereby he can exhaust his existing vasanas of Rajas and
Tamas.
IN THE FOLLOWING VERSES THE DUTIES ORDAINED
BY ONE'S NATURE, "SWABHAAVA," AND ONE'S
STATION IN LIFE, "SWADHARMA," ARE LAID OUT
WITH THE THOROUGHNESS OF A LAW BOOK:
41. Of scholars (BRAHMANAS) , of leaders (KSHATRIYAS)
and of traders (VAISHYAS) , as also of workers (SHUDRAS) ,
O Parantapa, the duties are distributed according to the
qualities born of their own nature.
After dealing with the various gunas in the preceding
stanza, Krishna now applies them to the social fabric of
humanity and thus intelligently classifies the entire
mankind under four distinct heads: the Brahmanas, the
Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the Shudras.
Different types of duties are assigned to each of these
classes of individuals depending upon their nature
(Swabhaava), which is ordered by the proportion of the
gunas in the make-up of each type of inner equipment. The
duties prescribed for a particular type depend upon the
manifestation of the inner ruling gunas, as expressed in the
individual's contact with the world and his activities in
1265

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

society. The good and bad are not diagnosed by merely
examining the texture of the person's skin or the colour of
his hair; an individual is judged only by his expressions in
life and by the quality of his contacts with the world
outside. These alone can reflect one's inner personality --the quality and texture of the contents of one's mindintellect.
After testing and determining the quality of the inner
personality, the individuals in the community are
classified, and different types of duties are prescribed for
each. Naturally, the duties prescribed for a Brahmana are
different from those expected of a Kshatriya; and the work
of the Vaishya and the Shudra should necessarily be
different from that of the Brahmana and the Kshatriya. The
Shastra enjoins duties, by pursuing which the
preponderant Tamas can be evolved into Rajas, which, in
its turn, can grow to become Sattwa. And, even then, the
seeker must wait for the sublimation of Sattwa, when
alone the final experience of the Infinite is gained.
By observing a person one can conclude as to which class
he belongs to --- whether to the Brahmana, the Kshatriya,
the Vaishya or the Shudra. In this context, when we say a
man is Sattwic, it only means that the Sattwic qualities are
predominant in him; even in the most Sattwic of persons,
at times, the Rajasic and the Tamasic qualities can and will
show up; so too, even in the most Tamasic man, Sattwa and
Rajas will necessarily show up sometimes. No one is
exclusively of one guna alone.
1266

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Today, as they are now worked out in India, these four
classifications have lost much of their meaning. They
signify merely a hereditary birth-right in the society, a
mere physical distinction that divides the society into
castes and sub-castes. A true Brahmana is necessarily a
highly cultured Sattwic man who can readily control his
sense-organs, and with perfect mastery over his mind, can
raise himself, through contemplation, to the highest peaks
of meditation upon the Infinite. But today's Brahmana is
one who is claiming his distinction by birth alone and
alas! he gets no reverence, because he has not striven to
deserve it.
ANSWERING THE FOUR TYPES OF NATURE, AS
DETERMINED
BY
THEIR
PSYCHOLOGICAL
CHARACTERISTICS, THERE ARE FOUR KINDS OF
SOCIAL LIVING, EACH HAVING A DEFINITE
FUNCTION IN SOCIETY: THEY ARE DESCRIBED
BELOW:
42. Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness and
also uprightness, knowledge, realisation, belief-in-God --- are the
duties of the BRAHMANAS, born of (their own) nature.
Herein we have a detailed enumeration of the duties of a
Brahmana born out of his own predominantly Sattwic
nature. Serenity (Shama), is one of his duties. Shama is
controlling the mind from running into the world-ofobjects seeking sense-enjoyments. Even if we shut off the
1267

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

world-of-objects by carrying ourselves away from the
tumults and temptations of life into a quiet, lonely place,
even there our minds will stride forth into the sense-fields
through the memories of our past indulgences. To control
consciously this instinctive flow of the mind towards the
sense-objects is called Shama.
SELF-CONTROL (Dama) --- Controlling the sense-organs,
which are the gateways through which the external world
of stimuli infiltrates into our mental domain and mars our
peace, is called Dama. A man practising Dama, even if he
be in the midst of sensuous objects, is not disturbed by
them. A true Brahmana is one who practises constantly
both Shama and Dama, serenity and self-control.
AUSTERITY (Tapas) --- Conscious physical self-denial in
order to economise the expenditure of human energy so
lavishly spent in the wrong channels of sense-indulgence,
and conserving it for reaching the higher unfoldment
within is called Tapas. By the practice of Shama and Dama,
the Brahmana will be steadily controlling both the mad
rush of his senses and his mind-wandering. This helps
him to conserve his inner vitality which would have been
otherwise spent in hunting after sense-joys. This
conserved energy is utilised for higher flights in
meditation. This subjective process of economising,
conserving, and redirecting one's energies within is called
Tapas. It is a Brahmana's duty to live in Tapas.

1268

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

PURITY (Shaucham) --- The Sanskrit term used here
includes external cleanliness and internal purity. Habits of
cleanliness in one's personal life and surroundings are the
governing conditions in the life of one who is practising
both Shama and Dama. The practice of Tapas makes him
such a disciplined person that he cannot stand any
disorderly confusion or state of neglect around and about
him. A person living in the midst of things thrown about
in a disorderly manner is certainly a man of slothful
nature and slovenly habits. It is the duty of the Brahmana
to keep himself ever clean and pure.
FORBEARANCE (Kshaanti) --- To be patient and forgiving
and thus to live without struggling even against wrongs
done against one, is "forbearance" --- the duty of a
Brahmana. Such an individual will never harbour any
hatred for anyone; he lives equanimously amidst both the
good and the bad.
UPRIGHTNESS (Aarjavam) --- This is a quality which
makes an individual straightforward in all his dealings,
and his uprightness makes him fearless in life. He is afraid
of none, and he makes no compromise of the higher calls
with the lower murmurings.
Cultivating the above six qualities --- serenity (Shama),
self-control (Dama), austerity (Tapas), purity (Shaucham),
forbearance
(Kshaanti),
and
straightforwardness
(Aarjavam) --- and expressing them in all his relationships
with the world outside is the life-long duty of a Brahmana.
1269

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The above-mentioned six artistic strokes complete the
picture of a Brahmana on the stage of the world when he
deals with things and beings in the various situations in
life. The Lord enumerates, in the stanza, three more duties
of a Brahmana which are the rules of conduct controlling
his spiritual life.
KNOWLEDGE (Jnaanam) --- The theoretical knowledge of
the world, of the structure of the equipments-ofexperience and their behaviour while coming in contact
with the outer world, of the highest goal of life, of the
nature of the spirit --- in short, knowledge of all that the
Upanishads deal with --- is included in the term Jnaanam.
WISDOM (Vijnaanam) --- If 'theoretical knowledge' is
Jnaanam then 'personal experience' is Vijnaanam.
Knowledge digested and assimilated brings home to man
an inward experience, and thereafter, he comes to live his
life guided by this deep inner experience called "wisdom."
Knowledge can be imparted, but "wisdom" is to be found
by the individual in himself. When a student discovers in
himself the enthusiasm to live the knowledge gained
through his studies, then from the field of his lived
experience arises "wisdom" --- Vijnaanam.
FAITH (Aastikyam) --- Unless one has a deep faith in what
one has studied and lived, the living itself will not be
enthusiastic and full. This ardency of conviction which is
the motive-force behind one who lives what he has
understood, is the secret sustaining power that steadily
1270

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

converts KNOWLEDGE into "wisdom." This inner order,
this intellectual honesty, this subtle unflagging
enthusiasm, is called "FAITH."
To grow and steadily cultivate knowledge, wisdom and
faith are the sacred duties of a Brahmana in his spiritual
life.
WHAT ARE THE DUTIES OF A 'KSHATRIYA?'
43. Prowess, splendour, firmness, dexterity, and also not fleeing
from battle, generosity, lordliness --- these are the duties of the
KSHATRIYAS, born of (their own) nature.
The Kshatriyas have a greater dose of Rajoguna in the
composition of their personality. A Kshatriya is not defined
by Lord Krishna as the lawful son of another Kshatriya. He
enumerates a series of qualities and behaviours noticed in
a truly Kshatriya personality. In the Geeta, the four "castes"
are described in terms of their manifested individuality
when coming in contact with the world-of-objects --- the
field of expression. In all these descriptions we meet with
details of the individual's mental and intellectual reactions
to his moral life.
PROWESS AND BOLDNESS (Shauryam and Tejah) --These mean the vigour and constancy with which he
meets the challenges in his life. He who has the above two
1271

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

qualities, heroism and vigour of pursuit, certainly
becomes a commanding personality.
FORTITUDE (Dhriti) --- This is already explained in
earlier stanzas. Herein, as applied to a Kshatriya, it is the
powerful will of the personality, who, having decided to
do something, pursues the "path" and discovers in himself
the necessary drive and constancy of purpose to meet, and
if necessary, break down all the obstacles until he gains
victory or success.
PROMPTITUDE (Daakshyam) --- The Sanskrit equivalent
for the army parade-ground command "Attention" is
"Daksha!" This quality of alertness and smart vigilance is,
indeed, Daakshyam. In the context here, it means that a
Kshatriya is prompt in coming to decisions and in
executing them. Such an individual is industrious and has
an enviable amount of perseverance, however hazardous
may the field of his activity be.
NOT FLEEING FROM BATTLE --- One who has all the
above qualities can never readily accept defeat in any field
of conflict. He will not leave any work incomplete. Since
Krishna is here generally classifying all human beings
according to the gunas predominant in them, these terms
should be understood in their greatest amplitude of
suggestion. No doubt, a true warrior should not step back
in any field of battle; but such literal interpretation is only
incomplete. The field-of-battle should include all fields of
competition wherein things and situations arrange
1272

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

themselves in opposition to the planned schemes of a man
of will and dash. In no such condition will a true Kshatriya
feel nervous. He never leaves a field which he has entered;
if at all he leaves, he leaves with the crown of success!
GENEROSITY (Daanam) --- Governments or kings cannot
be popular unless they loosen their purse-strings. Even in
modern days every government budget in all democratic
countries has amounts allocated under heads which are
not discussed and voted. A man of action cannot afford to
be miserly since his success will depend upon his
influence on a large number of friends and supporters.
The glory of a prince is in his compassion for others who
are in need of help.
LORDLINESS (Ishwara-bhaava) --- As a rule, without selfconfidence in one's own abilities one cannot lead others. A
leader must have such a firm faith in himself that he will
be able to reinforce other frail hearts around him with his
self-confidence. Thus, lordliness is one of the essential
traits in a Kshatriya. He must waft all around a fragrance
of brilliance and dynamism, electrifying the atmosphere
around him. A king is not made by his golden robes or bejewelled crown. The crown, the robe and the throne have a
knack of electing for themselves a true wearer. Lordliness
is the hallmark of Kshatriya.
These eight qualities --- bravery, vigour, constancy,
resourcefulness, promptitude, courage in the face of the
enemy, generosity and lordliness --- are enumerated here
1273

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

as the duties of a Kshatriya, meaning that it is the duty of a
true man-of-action to cultivate, to maintain and to express
these traits in himself. In no society can leaders of men
and affairs claim to be at once the spiritual leaders of the
people. Secular heads cannot be spiritual guides. But a
true leader is one who has the subtle ability to incorporate
the spiritual ideals of our culture into the work-a-day life
and maintain them in the community in all its
innumerable fields of activity.
THE DUTIES OF THE VAISHYAS AND SHUDRAS ARE
DESCRIBED IN THE FOLLOWING:
44. Agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade are the duties of the
VAISHYAS, born of (their own) nature; and service is the duty
of the SHUDRAS, born of (their own) nature.
Since each mind-intellect equipment is governed and
ruled over by its predominating quality (guna), each
equipment has its own nature to reckon with. A vehicle
that can efficiently work in one medium of transport
cannot with the same efficiency work in another medium,
a car is efficient on the road --- but on water? The Rajasic
mind cannot fly into meditation and maintain its poise as
easily and as beautifully as the Sattwic mind can.
Similarly, in the field in which a Kshatriya can outshine
everybody, a Vaishya or a Shudra cannot. To rise to the
highest station in social life all men cannot have
IDENTICAL opportunities. A social system can only give
1274

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

"equal opportunities" for all its members to develop their
gifts in and through life. In order to prove this thesis, the
various duties are prescribed that will help to mould the
personalities of the different types of men.
AGRICULTURE, BREEDING AND TENDING CATTLE,
TRADE AND COMMERCE --- These are three fields in
which a Vaishya can function inspiredly and exhaust his
imperfections. These are duties towards which he has an
aptitude because of his own nature. Work in a spirit of
DEDICATION AND SERVICE IS THE DUTY OF A
SHUDRA.
The mental temperament of a man determines what class
he belongs to and each class has been given particular
duties to perform in the world. If a man who is fit
temperamentally for one type of work is entrusted with a
different type of activity, he will bring chaos not only into
the field but also in himself. For example, if a Kshatriya
were asked to fan someone in a spirit of service, he may
condescend to do so, but one will find him ordering
somebody else, almost instinctively, to fetch a fan for him!
So too, if a man of commercial temperament, a Vaishya,
comes to serve as a temple-priest, the sacred place will
become, ere long, worse than a trading centre; and again,
let him become the head of any government, he will, out
of sheer instinct, begin doing profitable "business" from
the seat of governmental authority; people call it
corruption!!
1275

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

We must analyse and discover the type of vasanas and
temperaments that predominate in each one of us and
determine what types of men we are. None belonging to
the higher groups has any justification to look down with
contempt upon others who are of the lower types. Each
one serves the society as best as he can. Each one must
work in a spirit of dedication for his own evolution and
sense of fulfilment. When each one works thus according
to his vasanas and fully devotes his attention to his
prescribed duties, it is said here that he will develop
within himself and attain, in stages, the ultimate
Perfection.
When a person works devotedly, in the proper field and
in the environment best suited to him, he will be
exhausting the existing vasanas in him. And when the
vasanas are reduced he will experience tranquillity and
peace within and it will become possible for him to
discover more and more concentration and single-pointed
contemplation.
WITH THESE FACULTIES IN HIM MAN CAN
ULTIMATELY REACH THE STATE OF PERFECTION --THE LIFE IN THE SELF --- HOW?
45. Devoted, each to his own duty, man attains Perfection. How,
engaged in his own duty, he attains Perfection, listen.

1276

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

EACH DEVOTED TO HIS DUTY, MAN ATTAINS
PERFECTION --- By being loyal to our own level of
feelings and ideas, to our own development of
consciousness, we can evolve into higher states of selfunfoldment.
The truth of this classification of mankind may not be very
obvious, if we observe it only superficially. But the
biographies of all great men of action declare repeatedly
the precision with which this law-of-life works itself out in
human affairs. A tiny Corsican boy who was asked to tend
sheep refused to do so and reached Paris to become one of
the greatest generals the world had ever seen --Napoleon. A Goldsmith or a Keats would rather compose
his metres in a garret than take up a commercial job,
courting prosperity and a life of comfort. Each one is
ordered by his own Swabhaava, and each can discover his
fulfilment only in that self-ordered field of activity.
By thus working in the field ordered by one's own vasanas,
if one can live surrendering one's ego and ego-centric
desires to enjoy the fruits, one can achieve a sense of
fulfilment; and a great peace will arise out of the
exhaustion of one's vasanas. The renunciation of the ego
and its desires can never be accomplished unless there is a
spirit of dedication and a total surrender to the Infinite.
When unbroken awareness of the Lord becomes a
constant habit of the mind, dedication becomes effective,
and man's evolution starts.
1277

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Such an intelligent classification of human beings on the
basis of their physical behaviour, psychological structure
and intellectual aptitude is applicable not in India only.
This four-fold classification is universal, both in its
application in life and its implication in the cultural
development of man.
HOW CAN ONE, DEVOTED TO ONES OWN DUTY,
ATTAIN PERFECTION? "THAT DO THOU HEAR,"
SAYS LORD KRISHNA:
46. From Whom is the evolution of all beings, by Whom all this
is pervaded, worshipping Him with one's own duty, man
attains Perfection.
In this chapter the four-fold classification of men and the
duties of the individuals belonging to each classification
are given. When a man acts according to his "nature"
(Swabhaava) and station-in-life (Swadharma), his vasanas get
exhausted. This exhaustion of the load of vasanas and the
consequent sense of joy and relief can be gained only
when he learns to work and achieve in a spirit of total selfsurrender.
By constantly remembering the higher goal towards
which we are working our way, if we do our work
efficiently, this vasana-exhaustion takes place. The goal to
be constantly remembered is indicated in this stanza: "HE
FROM WHOM ALL BEINGS ARISE AND BY WHOM
1278

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ALL THIS IS PERVADED." The three equipments --- the
body, the mind and the intellect, that flutter out into
activity, are all in themselves inert matter with no
consciousness in themselves. It is only at the touch of the
Light-of-Life that inert matter starts singing its vasanas
through the various activities.
To remember constantly, this Consciousness, the Atman --the Atman that lends, as it were, Its dynamism to the
Matter that invests It in its activities --- is to stand apart
from all agitations in the field of strife. Just as a musician,
constantly conscious of the background drone, sings his
songs easily in tune, just as a dancer dances effortlessly to
the rhythm of the drum, such a man is never caught on
the wrong foot ever in life. A new glow of tranquil peace
and dynamic love comes to shine through all his actions,
and his achievements radiate the shadowless Light-ofPerfection, unearthly and Divine.
Work can thus be changed into worship by attuning our
minds all through our activity to the consciousness of the
Self. A self-dedicated man so working in the
consciousness of the Supreme pays the greatest homage to
his Creator. This subtle change in attitude transforms the
shape of even the most dreary situation. Even the most
dreadfully unpleasant field of activity is converted into a
sacred chamber of devotion --- into a silent hall of prayer -- into a quiet seat of meditation!

1279

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

By thus setting one's hands and feet to work in the fieldof-objects with one's mind and intellect held constantly
conscious of the Divine Presence, one can attain
"THROUGH THE PERFORMANCE OF ONE'S OWN
DUTIES THE HIGHEST PERFECTION." Work results in
self-fulfilment, apart from its legitimate "fruits." The inner
personality gets integrated, and such an integrated person
grows in his meditation and evolves quickly.
"AND YET, WHY SHOULD I NOT GO AND
MEDITATE?" SEEMS TO BE THE HONEST DOUBT IN
ARJUNA'S MIND. KRISHNA ANSWERS:
47. Better is one's own duty (though) destitute of merits, than
the duty of another well-performed. He who does the duty
ordained by his own nature incurs no sin.
The opening line of this stanza has been exhaustively
discussed earlier (III-35). To work in any field ordered by
one's own vasanas is better, because in that case, there is a
chance for exhausting the existing vasanas. When an
individual strives in a field contrary to the existing
vasanas, he not only fails to gain any exhaustion of the
existing vasanas, but also creates a new load of vasanas in
his temperament. Hence, it is said here: "BETTER IS
ONE'S OWN DHARMA THOUGH IMPERFECT THAN
THE DHARMA OF ANOTHER WELL-PERFORMED."

1280

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

By performing "duties ordained by one's own nature"
(Swabhaava-Niyatam-Karma) the individual comes to no
evil --- meaning, the individual has no chance of
imprinting any new impressions on his mind --- the
impressions which, in their maturity, might force him to
strive, to seek, to achieve and to indulge.
This closing chapter of the Geeta is a peroration of the
beautiful discourse of the inspired Divine, and it is,
naturally therefore, a summary of the whole Geeta. Hence,
we find here a reiteration of almost all the salient ideas
which have been discussed earlier, and which are very
important for the cure of the "Arjuna-disease.
Anyone can appreciate the logic of it if he considers the
following: (1) the deadly poison in the fangs of a serpent
never kills the serpent; (2) living organisms crawling in
fermented wine never get drunk; (3) the malarial germs in
the mosquitoes do not attack them with shivering fevers.
THE SWABHAAVA OF EACH ONE CANNOT DESTROY
HIM! If the poison is drawn from the fangs and wine is
poisoned, the crawling organisms die. Similarly, if the
Kshatriyas were to perform the duties prescribed for the
Brahmana-type of equipment, they would be only doing
harakiri. Arjuna was a Kshatriya; hence retiring from the
battle-field to a jungle for meditation would have
destroyed him.
In short, it is no use employing our minds in fields which
are contrary to our nature. Everyone has a precise place in
1281

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the scheme of created things. Each one has his own
importance and none is to be despised, for, each can do
something which the others cannot do so well. There is no
redundancy in the Lord's creation; not even a single blade
of grass, anywhere, at any time, is unnecessarily created!
Everything has a purpose. Not only the good but the bad
also are His manifestations and serve His purpose. The
Pandavas' glory is, no doubt, great, but the manifestation
of the wickedness in the Kauravas is also the glory of His
creation. Without the latter, the history of the former
would not have been complete. Nothing is to be
condemned; none to be despised. Every thing is He. And
He alone IS.
BUT IF THE DUTY TO WHICH WE ARE BOUND IS
RIDDLED WITH EVIL, ARE WE TO FOLLOW IT?
KRISHNA ANSWERS:
48. One should not abandon, O Kaunteya, the duty to which
one is born, though faulty; for, are not all undertakings
enveloped by evil, as fire by smoke?
After explaining this much about the nature (Swabhaava)
and the corresponding station-in-life (Swadharma), Krishna
builds up the idea to a subtle climax. His advice is general
and it is meant for all people, of all times, in all situations.
Even when the work so ordained by the existing vasanas
1282

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

(Sahajam Karma) is full of evil (Sadosham), Krishna's advice
is that one should not relinquish it (Na-Tyajet).
Superficially reading this declaration in a hurry, one is apt
to think that this is not spirituality. But to a careful
thinker, the term "born with" (Sahajam) solves the riddle.
There is an ocean of difference between the meanings of
the phrases "BORN WITH" and "BORN INTO."
There are two forces that control and guide, define and
determine, our actions --- (i) the impulses brought forth by
the pressure of the mental temperaments within; and (ii)
the pressure of environments that tickles new temptations
in ourselves. One is to follow faithfully, the subjective
vasanas, even if they be defective. But at the same time, we
must courageously renounce all the demands that the
objective world makes upon us from without.
The vasanas one is BORN WITH are to be lived through,
without ego and desire; while the vasana-creating
atmosphere INTO which one is born should not be
allowed to contaminate one's personality. Krishna is very
careful in indicating that a spiritual seeker must
constantly strive hard to stand apart from the shackling
effects of the environments. According to the Geeta, man
is the master of circumstances. To the extent he comes to
assert this mastery, to that extent he is evolved.
IN FACT, "ARE NOT ALL ACTIONS (WORKS)
CLOUDED BY DEFECTS, AS FIRE IS BY THE SMOKE?"
1283

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here the term used to indicate "work" (Arambha) is very
important. This Sanskrit term Arambha means "beginning."
The term was used earlier (XII-16) where also we were
asked to "RENOUNCE THE SENSE OF AGENCY IN
ACTIVITY." When there is an ego-centric sense of selfarrogation, the "I-am-the-self" arrogation, the "I-am-thedoer" sense, there is, invariably, creation of new vasanas
and therefore, it is full of defects (Dosha).
This defect is as unavoidable as the appearance of smoke
in fire. The more an oven is ventilated in the atmospheric
air, the less smoky becomes the fire burning therein. The
more our inner bosom is ventilated with the
Consciousness Divine, the less will the ego assert, and
therefore, no defects can pollute the actions. If there be an
influx of wrong vasanas within, the earlier we exhaust
them through "action" --- without any ego or ego-centric
desire of enjoying their fruits --- the quicker shall the load
of existing vasanas be lifted from our personality.
WHAT IS THE BENEFIT OF THUS ACTING
ACCORDING TO THE TEMPERAMENTS WITH WHICH
ONE IS BORN?
49. He whose intellect is unattached everywhere, who has
subdued his self, from whom desire has fled, he, through
renunciation, attains the Supreme State of Freedom-fromaction.
1284

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It must be remembered, that the entire Geeta is addressed
to Prince Arjuna standing confused at the immensity of
his duty. He wants to run away into the jungle and live in
a spirit of what he understands as 'renunciation.' Lord
Krishna's thesis in the entire Geeta is that a MERE running
away from life and its duties is not Samnyasa nor is it
renunciation. Here, in the stanza, the Lord is defining the
State-of-Actionlessness (Naishkarmya-Siddhi). This state is
reached when we do not identify ourselves with the
equipments-of-matter which are the instruments-ofperception, the three instruments of false interpretation of
Truth (Body, Mind and Intellect). To regain our life in
Pure Consciousness is the Supreme State.
When we forget our spiritual dignity, the misconception
of the ego arises; we lose our real personality and come to
believe that we are merely the limited ego. Such selfforgetfulness can be observed in any drunken reveller. He
forgets his individual personality and status in life and
assumes to himself a false identity and continues to be in
it as long as he is in a state of intoxication. In his false
concept of himself the drunken fool acts, disgracing his
education and station in life.
The ego arises when we are ignorant and forgetful of our
spiritual nature. When this 'ignorance'is ended, there is
the experience of the Infinite Bliss of the All-FullConsciousness. Naturally, there is no want felt, and
therefore, no desire can arise. When desires are absent, the
thought-breedings end. When thoughts are dried up,
1285

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

actions, which are the parade of thoughts, marching out
through the archway of the body, are no more. This state
is called "ACTIONLESSNESS" --- Naishkarmya Siddhi.
The Supreme State described so elaborately in the
Upanishadic literature and indicated here by the technical
term 'Naishkarmya-Siddhi,' is that 'WISE' state-of-being
wherein there is no 'ignorance.' DESIRES are the children
of 'ignorance'; THOUGHTS arise from desires; ACTIONS
are thoughts expressed in the outer world. In the spirituopsychology of Vedanta we may thus say that 'ignorance'is
the great-grandfather of action! With the 'knowledge' of
the Spirit, 'ignorance'ends, and in that State, thoughts and
actions cannot be. This is the State of Full Awakening, and
with reference to its previous condition as expressed and
manifested through the body, this condition is indicated
as "ACTIONLESS-NESS" or "THOUGHTLESS-NESS" or
"DESIRELESS-NESS."
The Geetaacharya, in this stanza, declares that this State of
Perfection, defined as the State of Actionlessness, cannot
be gained by a cheap and ignominious escape from the
fields of life's activities. Making use of the fields, we must
gain in purity by getting rid of the existing vasanas,
through selfless activities. Making use of the fields, we
must gain in purity by getting rid of the existing vasanas,
through selfless activities which are prescribed to each one
of us according to the type to which we naturally belong.
Arjuna being a "Kshatriya", his duty is to fight; and by
fighting alone will he exhaust his vasanas. By the
1286

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

exhaustion of the vasanas alone can one hope to reach the
Supreme State of Pure Awareness.
AN UNDERSTANDING UNATTACHED EVERYWHERE
(Asakta-Buddhih Sarvatra) --- An intellect that is attached to
sensuous things of the world outside knows no peace
within itself. It gets agitated and the frail body gets
shattered as the fuming mind escapes through it in its
hunt for satisfaction among the sense-objects. A 'cleanshaven intellect,' devoid of all the cobwebs of attachments
with the equipments of perceptions, feeling and thinking,
and their respective objects perceived, felt or thought of, is
the vehicle that stands dissolved, revealing THAT which
pulsates through them all. This is the true State-ofActionlessness and a man who has earlier disciplined his
intellect alone can attain it.
In the case of Arjuna, his tall talks of detachment and
renunciation were false urges of escapism paraded as an
angelic urge. His Samnyasa arose out of his "attachment" to
his kith and kin, while true Samnyasa must arise out of
"detachment."
ONE WHO HAS SUBDUED HIS EGO (Jitaatmaa) --- An
intellect of complete detachment is an impossible dream.
The seeker subdues his heart which ever seeks its
flickering joys in sense-gratifications. This self-mastery of
the mind is impossible as long as there are even the
minutest traces of desire in him. One from whom all
desires have fled (Vigata-sprihah) alone can subdue the
1287

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

mind, and such a seeker alone can accomplish the state of
complete detachment of his intellect from the world of
sense-objects.
Mind is the seat of all vanities of agency, like "I am the
doer" sense (Kartritwa-bhaavanaa). The intellect is the seat
of all false arrogations that "I-am-the-enjoyer" (Bhoktritwabhavanaa). These two together make up the ego, and it is
fed, nurtured and nourished by its clinging attachments
(spriha) to the joy that is in the objects of the world outside.
By correct analysis and investigations, when the "spriha" is
dried up, both the senses of enjoyership and doership will
get steadily sublimated, leaving behind the Infinite
experience of the Self. The Geeta is never tired of
repeating that self-restraint and freedom from desire are
the unavoidable pre-requisites for spiritual growth.
Herein, we have a beautiful example of explaining the
Supreme Goal, not in achieving any Higher State, but as
the state of complete detachment from the lower urges.
FREEDOM FROM ACTION IS A CONDITION IN
WHICH ALONE THE EXPERIENCES OF THE SUPREME
BEING CAN RUSH IN. HOW? LEARN THIS FROM ME
IN BRIEF:
50. How he, who has attained perfection, reaches BRAHMAN
(the Eternal) , that in brief do you learn from Me, O! Kaunteya,
that Supreme State-of-Knowledge.
1288

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Here we are told how to get detached from the wrong
tendencies in life, and how, to that extent, we attain
serenity and composure. Detachment from matterhallucinations itself is the rediscovery of the spiritual
beauty. The following few stanzas make a beautiful
section of this chapter which refreshingly reminds us of
the various descriptions of a Man-of-Perfection that were
given earlier, throughout the Lord's Song. When we thus
get purified, meaning, when the intellect becomes free
from its attachments, and the mind and body come well
under the control of the intellect, then alone are we fit for
the "Path-of-Meditation," which is the process of
accomplishing and fulfilling renunciation of the lower,
base, ego-sense.
It is not possible to renounce all attachments completely,
unless one experiences the Truth, and thereby becomes
the Infinite Self. Our attempt now is to reduce our
attachments to the irreducible minimum, leaving but the
thinnest film of 'ignorance'veiling the Supreme. Krishna
says here, "LEARN THAT FROM ME IN BRIEF, O, son of
Kunti, how to remove this last lingering film of
'ignorance'and thereby get permanently established in that
Supreme God-consciousness, which is the Self."
THE
TECHNIQUE-OF-MEDITATION
IS
BEING
DESCRIBED NOW; THIS AND THE FOLLOWING TWO
STANZAS EXPLAIN WHAT SHOULD BE THE
CONDITION OF THE EQUIPMENTS OF PERCEPTION,
1289

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

FEELING, AND THINKING AT THE TIME OF PERFECT
MEDITATION:
51. Endowed with a pure intellect; controlling the self by
firmness; relinquishing sound and other objects; and
abandoning attraction and hatred;
ENDOWED WITH PURE UNDERSTANDING --- An
intellect that has grown to remain without vaasanaas. An
intellect that has thus purified itself of all its tendencies of
joy-hunting is indicated here as pure (Vishuddha)
understanding.
CONTROLLING THE MIND AND THE SENSE WITH
FORTITUDE --- These two sabotage the harmony and
balance in a meditator when he is at his seat of meditation.
At that moment the sense-organs receive a rush of stimuli
with which they can disturb the music of meditation in the
mind; or, often the mind can topple down from its steady
concentration, by itself remembering its own experiences
of the past. By controlling both these, which were earlier
described as Shama and Dama, the seeker comes to tune
himself up properly. He becomes invulnerable to all such
attacks.
The idea of controlling the mind and sense-organs
described in the earlier epithet is clearly elucidated in the
second line of the stanza. RENOUNCING SENSEOBJECTS --- controlling the sense-organs means allowing
1290

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

none of the stimuli such as sound, form, touch, taste or
smell to infiltrate through their respective gateways of
ears, eyes, skin, tongue and the nose. When thus a
complete wall-of-understanding has been built around the
mind, protecting it from any onslaught from the outer
world, the mind can, of its own accord, either dance in
some REMEMBERED joy, or sob in grief at some
EXPECTED sorrow --- because of its likes and dislikes,
loves and hates. Therefore, these instinctive impulses of
the mind are also to be controlled.
To summarise, a meditator is one who has: (1) an intellect
purified of all its extrovert desires; (2) a mind, together
with the sense-organs, brought well under the control of
this intellect, so purified; (3) the sense-organs no more
contacting the sense-objects; and (4) a mind that has given
up its ideas of likes and dislikes. It is this individual who
becomes a successful meditator.
AGAIN:
52. Dwelling in solitude; eating but little; speech, body and
mind subdued; always engaged in meditation and
concentration; taking refuge in dispassion;
DWELLING IN SOLITUDE (Vivikta-Sevee) --- A seeker
who has developed all the above-mentioned physical,
mental and intellectual adjustments, must now seek a
sequestered spot of loneliness. This does not mean that he
1291

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

must move out of a town to a jungle. The term indicates
only a spot "wherein there is the least disturbance." Even
in the midst of a market there are moments when it is
deserted and quiet. If the seeker is sincere, he can discover
such moments of complete solitude under his own roof.
EATING BUT LITTLE --- Over-indulgence and stuffing
oneself with highly nutritive food is fattening the body
and thickening the subtlety of one's intellectual activities.
Temperance is the law for all spiritual students (VI-17).
CONTROLLING SPEECH, BODY AND MIND --- The
mind cannot be subdued unless the body is brought under
its command. The body is constituted of the sense-organs
of perception and action. The grossest manifestation of the
mind is action, and to control action is to discipline the
mind. The term SPEECH used here indicates "all senseorgans-of-action and their functions"; and the term BODY
represents "the organs-of-perception and all their activities
of perceiving their respective objects." Unless these two
sets of organs are controlled, the mind cannot be subdued.
In fact, the mind ITSELF, at the body-level, becomes the
sense-organs, and the mind projected away from the body
is the great universe of sense-objects. When the mind,
playing through the body, identifies itself with its own
projections --- the objects --- it is called PERCEPTION; and
when it comes in contact with the world-of-objects seeking
satisfaction and entertainment, it is called ACTION.
Disciplining action and regulating perception --- in short,
1292

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

eliminating the ego-centric attitude in all our perceptions,
in all our relationships with the world-of-objects, is what
is advised here.
EVER ENGAGED IN MEDITATION --- Controlling the
actions and perceptions of the mind is not possible as long
as the mind is constantly flowing out through the senseorgans towards the sense-objects. Seeking sensegratifications, the mind is in a constant state of agitation.
To quieten such a mind, it is necessary that we must give
it some "point-of-contemplation" wherein, as it engages
itself more and more, it shall discover consummate
happiness and get sufficiently disengaged from
everything else. Diverting the mind from the world of
sense-objects and maintaining it in a steady flow towards
contemplation of the Lord in an utter attitude of
identification, is called MEDITATION. To be steadily in a
state of such an all-consuming dedication unto a nobler
and higher ideal is the method of cooling down the mind's
boiling lust for sense-enjoyments.
POSSESSED OF DISPASSION --- Dispassion is Vairaagya.
It is not a mere self-denial of any object of enchantment,
but it is a state when the mind rebounds upon itself from
the objects as a result of its discovery that the objects
contain no glow of happiness. The essence of dispassion is
not in our running away from the object; from a truly dispassionate man, the objects run away in inexplicable
despair.
1293

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

When the old interests of a person die away and when he
is ordered by new intellectual visions, new interests rise
up in his mind; then the old world-of-objects around him
suddenly retires, yielding place to the new set of things
that he has willed around him by his newly developed
mind. As long as I was a vicious man, sensuous friends
and pleasure-seekers crowded my drawing-room; when I
changed my way-of-life and took to serious social work
and political activities, the group of idlers went away
yielding their places to politicians and social workers.
After a time I grew in my mental make-up, and so, in my
spiritual interests, even these politicians with their powerpolitics, and the social workers with their unspeakable
jealousies and rivalries retired, yielding their places to
men of thought and spiritual benediction. This is a typical
example of how, as a mind grows, it leaves its old toys
behind and enters totally into a greater field of the nobler
gains of life.
To sum up, a true seeker of the Higher Life must seek
solitude, live in temperance, subdue his speech, body and
mind, and must live in a spirit of dispassion, a true life of
aspiration to heave himself towards the ideal.
THESE EFFORTS CAN BUILD UP A TEMPLE OF
SUCCESS ONLY WHEN THE INNER PERSONALITY
HAS A DEEP FOUNDATION UPON CERTAIN
ENDURING VALUES OF LIFE. THESE ARE
ENUMERATED IN THE FOLLOWING:
1294

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

53. Having abandoned egoism, power, arrogance, desire, anger
and aggrandisement, and freed from the notion of 'mine, ' and
so peaceful --- he is fit to become BRAHMAN.
If the preceding verse indicated things that are to be
acquired and brought about in the relatively outer
surfaces of the meditator's personality, here we have a list
of things which are to be renounced from the inner core of
the meditator's personality. Here are the enduring valuesof-life a meditator must learn to live.
The items enumerated in the stanza are not, in fact, so
many different items, but they are all different
manifestations of one and the same wrong notion, namely
the "I-act-mentality" (Ahamkara). When this "sense-ofagency" develops, ego-centric vanities intensify within our
bosom, and they manifest as "power" (Balam) --- the
"power" to strive and struggle, sweat and strain, to fulfil
passions and desires. A powerful ego will, with each
success in the sensuous world, gather to itself more and
more "pride," or "arrogance" (Darpam).
To an individual personality, working under the influence
of both "power" and "arrogance," "lust and anger" (Kaama
and Krodha) are but natural, and thereafter, he becomes a
mad machine of restlessness within and of disturbances
around, ever anxiously bearing himself down upon the
society in order that he may, by means fair or foul,
1295

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

acquire, possess and aggrandise the objects of his fancy,
indicated here by the term "aggrandisement" (Parigraha).
The six items listed above are nothing but manifestations
of the "sense-of-agency" --- the 'I-act-mentality'
(Ahamkaara). Krishna asks the meditator to forsake these
and thus to immediately become egoless (Nirmamah) and
peaceful (Shaantah). This is not the peace of the grave nor
the quiet of the desert; this is the peace that arises out of
the fullness
of 'wisdom,' out of our absolute satisfaction experienced
in the Realm-of-Perfection.
All restlessness is caused by the ego and its onward rush
towards finite objects, seeking among the ephemeral, a
satisfaction and joy that is permanent and enduring.
When this sense-of-agency and endless seeking of sensegratifications have been renounced, the seeker (saadhaka)
experiences a relative quiet within his bosom. He who is
tuned thus, through understanding and discipline, can
discover in himself the required balance and equipoise to
rocket his total personality into the higher climbs of
"conscious unfoldment." The stanza does not say that such
an individual has reached Perfection, but it definitely says
that "HE IS FIT TO BECOME BRAHMAN." The above is
but a preliminary preparation for the final realisation.
WHAT
THEN
IS
THE
NEXT
STAGE
DEVELOPMENT? THE GEETA EXPLAINS:

OF
1296

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

54. Becoming BRAHMAN, serene in the Self, he neither
grieves nor desires; the same to all beings, he obtains a supreme
devotion towards Me.
After liquidating the ego and its manifestations --enumerated in the preceding stanza as power, pride, lust,
passion and sense of possession --- the seeker comes to
experience a relatively greater peace within, as he is
released from all the confusions generally created by the
psychological mal-adjustments and intellectual false
evaluations of life. This newly discovered inner
tranquillity, no doubt artificially propped up for the time
being by severe self-discipline, should be positively
reinforced by definite efforts and constant vigilance.
With constant self-effort, relative peace in the mind is to
be maintained for longer periods of time and zealously
guarded. Joys and sorrows will be constantly reaching our
bosom from the outer world; we are helpless before them.
For, even when the "sense-of-agency" has been renounced,
the other aspect of the ego, "I-enjoy-mentality" (Bhoktritwabhaavanaa) will assert itself and poison the mind of the
meditator. A worm cut into two pieces becomes two
separate, independent living worms ere long. So too, if
one aspect of the ego, the "I-do-mentality" is conquered,
we must equally attend to the destruction of the other
aspect of the ego, the "I-enjoy-mentality;" or else, the
surviving part will revive within a very short time and we
shall discover a healthier ego, potentially more powerful,
1297

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dangerously rising
individuality.

out

of

the

seemingly

dead

One who has read well, reflected upon and understood
the theme of the Absolute Reality as discussed in the
Scriptures, is indicated here by the term "Brahma-Bhootah."
This word employed in this verse should not be construed
as "one who has become Brahman." It can only mean "one
who has convinced oneself of the existence and nature of
the Reality as discussed in the Scriptures." Once this
Spiritual Truth is understood, the student necessarily
becomes less agitated, because, all disturbances enter our
life through our identification with the equipments-ofexperiences only. To the extent an intellect realises the
existence of the diviner aspect in it, and so automatically
withdraws its all-out clinging to the matter-realm, to that
extent it is not disturbed by the objects of perception,
feeling and thought. Thus it discovers a growing
tranquillity (Prasannaatmaa) within itself.
A seeker who has gained the "knowledge" of Brahman
through STUDY, and make it his own through
REFLECTION, gains the tranquillity of composure as a
result of his understanding, and therefore experiences a
partial liquidation of his ego-sense. Thereby he discovers
in himself the courage to stand apart, both from grief and
desire. He grieves not (Na Shochati) because he feels no
incompleteness in himself, as he used to feel in the earlier
days of his arrogant ego. Since there is no sense of
imperfection, his intellect no longer spins new and novel
1298

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

plans for satisfactions and temporary gratifications, which
are called desires. Naturally, one who grieves not in life
desires not (Na Kaankshati) for the possession of anything
to make his happiness complete.
A tranquil seeker --- who, in his understanding, comes to
desire nothing and has developed an independent source
of happiness which is free from the presence of the
absence of any external environment --- lives in the world,
with a totally new set of values of life, in which, according
to him, there is nothing but the constant experience of the
Divine presence. Naturally, he develops an equanimity of
vision (V-18, 19 and 20).
THIS TYPE OF AN INDIVIDUAL ATTAINS SUPREME
DEVOTION UNTO ME --- Earlier, an entire chapter has
been devoted to the discussion on devotion (Ch. XII)
wherein we found that, according to the Scripture,
devotion is measured by our sense of identification with
the Higher Ideal. In order to identify with the Infinite
Truth, the seeker must have a definite amount of
detachment from his usual channels of dissipation, both in
the outer world and the realms within.
The previous verse indicated the methods of detachment
and it was said that he who has accomplished them in his
inner composition is the only one who is capable of
striving for and succeeding in a true identification with
the play of the Infinite in and through the finite. The
expansiveness of vision, the catholicity of love and the
1299

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

release from sense preoccupation --- all these are
necessary in order to produce in the seeker, supreme love
for the Lord. There is yet another stage in one's pilgrimage
to Truth.
WHAT THEN IS THE NEXT STAGE?
55. By devotion he knows Me in Essence, what and who I am;
then, having known Me in My Essence, he forthwith enters into
the Supreme.
BY DEVOTION HE COMES TO KNOW ME --- Devotion,
as we have explained, is "love for the Supreme." Love is
measured by the degree of identification the lover
maintains with the beloved. When an ego-centric
individuality, having made all the above adjustments,
increasingly seeks and discovers its identity with the Self,
it comes to experience the true nature of the Self more and
more clearly. Such a seeker comes to understand "WHAT
AND WHO I AM."
In the entire Geeta, the first person singular is used by the
Lord to indicate the Supreme Goal. It is not Lord Krishna,
as an individual person who is indicated by the terms 'I'
and 'Me' as used in these discourses. Remember, this is the
Lord's own Song, sung to revive His devotees, and the
pronouns used here represent the Paramatman. To know
the Self means to know both Its nature and identity. These
are the topics in all scriptures. But the scriptural study
1300

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

gives us only an intellectual comprehension of Truth and
not its Essence (Tattwatah), a spiritual apprehension of
Truth as a lived experience.
THEN, HAVING KNOWN ME IN ESSENCE --- When
this experience comes through a slow and steady
unfoldment of the Light of Consciousness, through the
dropping of the veils of 'ignorance'created by our
identifications with the body, we come to apprehend, IN
TOTO, the Infinite. The individuality or the ego, ends and
"HE THEREAFTER ENTERS ME."
The "ENTRY" mentioned here is not like that of a man
entering a structure, a house separate from himself. There
is no ego to enter into the plane of God-consciousness. The
term "ENTRY" is used here exactly in the same fashion as
"the dreamer ENTERS the waking state." The dreamer
cannot retain his own individuality when he ENTERS the
waking world, but he himself becomes the "waker."
Similarly, when the ego ENTERS God-consciousness, the
individuality cannot retain itself as such. The
misconception that he is an individual ends and he
rediscovers, becomes or awakens to, the Infinite
Brahmanhood --- the State of Krishna-Consciousness.
DEVOTION FOR THE LORD IS NEVER COMPLETE
WITHOUT SERVICE TO THE LIVING WORLD OF
CREATURES:

1301

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

56. Doing all actions, always taking refuge in Me, by My grace
he obtains the Eternal, Indestructible State or Abode.
The philosophy of the Geeta is extremely dynamic. The
Song of the Lord is an innocent-looking magazine of
power which can be detonated by correct understanding.
The warmth of living makes it explode, blasting the crust
of ignorance that has grown around the noble personality
and its divine possibilities in the student.
Devotion to the Lord (Bhakti), in the Geeta, is not a mere
passive surrender unto the ideal, nor a mere physical
ritualism. Lord Krishna insists, not only upon our
identification with the Higher through an intelligent
process of detachment, from both the senses, of
"AGENCY" and "ENJOYMENT," but also upon the
understanding and the inner experience positively
brought out in all our contacts with the outer world, in all
our relationships.
Religion, to Lord Krishna, is not fulfilled by a mere
withdrawal from the outer world of sense objects, but in a
definite come-back into the world, bringing into it the
fragrance of peace and joy of the yonder, to brighten and
beautify the drab, inert objects that constitute the world.
Therefore, after describing one who can be considered as
the higher devotee, in this stanza, Krishna now adds
another condition to be fulfilled by all seekers.

1302

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The Geetaacharya never wants to receive any devotee at
His gate, nor will He give an audience to anyone, unless
the seeker caries the passport of self-less service to society
--- "PERFORMING CONTINUOUSLY ALL ACTIONS,
ALWAYS TAKING REFUGE IN ME."
In order to serve without the "sense-of-agency," the
practical method is "TAKE REFUGE IN ME." Such a
seeker, who is constantly working in fulfilling his
obligatory duties to society and towards himself has "My
grace" (Mat prasaada).
The Supreme has no existence apart from His Grace; He is
His Grace, His Grace is He. The Grace of the Self,
therefore, means more and more the play of divine
Consciousness in and through the personality layers in the
individual. In an individual, to the extent his mind and
intellect are available, in their discipline to be ruled over
by spiritual truth, to that extent he is under the blessing of
His Grace.
HE ATTAINS THE ETERNAL IMMUTABLE STATE --When thus working in the world, without the sense of
agency and enjoyment, the existing vasanas become
exhausted and the ego gets eliminated. Awakening thus
from the delusory projections of the ego, the individual
attains the State of Pure Consciousness and comes to live
thereafter the Eternal, Immortal State --- THE KRISHNASTATE OF PERFECTION.
1303

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In the preceding three stanzas the "Paths" of Knowledge,
Devotion and Action are indicated, and in all of them the
same goal of realising the seeker's oneness with the
Supreme has been indicated. Integral saadhanaa is the core
of the Geeta technique. To synthesize the methods of
Work, Devotion and Knowledge is at once the discipline
of the body, mind, and intellect. For, all disciplines
PURSUED AT THE BODY LEVEL, in order to control the
mind and turn it towards the ideal, are called Karma Yoga;
all methods of channelising emotions in order to
DISCIPLINE THE MIND to contemplate upon the Higher
are called Bhakti Yoga and all study and reflection,
detachment and meditation, PRACTISED AT THE
INTELLECTUAL LEVEL, whereby, again the mind is
lifted to the realm of the silent experience of its own
Infinitude are called Jnaana Yoga. To practise all the three
during our life is to discipline all the three layers in us.
Thus, the philosophy of total spiritual transformation of
the perceiver, the feeler and the thinker, all at once, is the
prime contribution that the Geeta has to make to the
timeless tradition of the Hindu culture, as available for us
in the Upanishads.
THEREFORE:
57. Mentally renouncing all actions in Me, having Me as the
Highest Goal, resorting to the YOGA -of-discrimination, ever
fix your mind in Me.
1304

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

RESIGNING MENTALLY ALL DEEDS TO ME --- Both
the ego and the ego-centric anxieties for enjoying are to be
renounced at the altar of the Lord, and thus to act in the
world is the 'path,' through which a man of action reaches
the greater cultural climes. This idea of surrender has been
discussed earlier, very exhaustively. This spirit of
surrender can come only when the student has infinite
courage to maintain a steady aspiration for "HAVING ME
AS THE HIGHEST GOAL." The mind needs a positive
hold upon something, before it can be persuaded to leave
its present props.
RESORTING TO BUDDHI YOGA --- The intellect's main
function is discrimination. To discriminate the false from
the true, and to fix ourselves on the path of seeking the
true, is called Buddhi yoga. Controlling life and regulating
its movements through discrimination is Karma Yoga. And
thus the term 'Buddhi yoga' is an original coined-word, met
with only in the Geeta, to indicate in essence the "Path-ofSelfless-Action." It has been used in the very early
portions of the Geeta and there it has been very
exhaustively explained.
PLEASE EVER FIX YOUR MIND UPON ME --- One who
has fixed Krishna - Tattwa as the goal of his life, one who
surrenders himself mentally at all times at this altar, and
serves all His creatures, one who ever discriminates and
avoids all undivine thoughts and ego-centric selfassertions --- such a one alone can naturally come to fix his
thoughts constantly upon the Lord.
1305

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is an eternal law of mental life that "AS WE THINK SO
WE BECOME." A devotee who has thus come to live all
his activities in dedication to his goal, the KrishnaConsciousness, must necessarily come to live as Krishna,
and experience the Eternal, Immutable, State of the Self.
SUPPOSING ONE REFUSES TO FOLLOW THIS
SEEMINGLY ARDUOUS 'PATH,' WHAT WOULD BE
HIS CONDITION? LISTEN:
58. Fixing your mind upon Me, you shall, by My grace,
overcome all obstacles, but if, from egoism, you will not hear
Me, you shall perish.
Lord Krishna, in essence, says: "By your thoughts,
renounce all your activities in Me." All activities in the
world are only expressions of the Divine Conscious-ness
flashing Its brilliance through the body. In all activities be
conscious of the Lord, without Whom no action is ever
possible. Keep Him as your Goal. Make your intellect
constantly aware of this "Lord of all actions." Gradually,
the mind and the body will begin to work under the
command of such an inspired intellect.
How will this constant remembrance of the Lord help?
This is now being answered. Krishna says: "HE, WHO
HAS COMPLETELY FIXED ALL HIS THOUGHTS UPON
ME, WILL CROSS OVER ALL DIFFICULTIES BY MY
GRACE." Most of our obstacles in life are imaginary --1306

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

created by false fears and deceitful anxieties of our own
confused mind. The "grace" referred to here is "the result
accrued in our mind when it is properly tuned up to and
peacefully settled in contemplation upon the Infinite." It
does not mean any special consideration shown by the allloving Lord to some rare persons of His own choice. The
Grace of the all-pervading is present everywhere because
Grace is His form. Just as the ever-present sunlight on a
bright day cannot illumine my room as long as the
windows are closed, so too, the harmony and joy of life of
the Infinite cannot penetrate into our life, as long as the
windows of discrimination in us are tightly shut. To the
extent the windows of my room are opened, to that extent
the room is flooded by the sunlight; to the extent a seeker
pursues his saadhanaa and brings about the abovementioned adjustments, to that extent the Grace of the Self
shall flood his within.
In the second line of the verse, the Lord warns against all
those who, in their utter ignorance, disobey this Law of
Life. Natural laws are irrevocable; they have neither eyes,
nor ears. They just continue in their own rhythm and that
man is happy who discovers the law and obeys it
implicitly.
BUT IF, FROM EGOISM, YOU WILL NOT HEAR ME,
YOU SHALL PERISH --- This is not a threat hurled down
upon mankind by a tyrannical power, to frighten the
human beings into obedience. This is not comparable with
the threat of hell held out by other religions. This is a mere
1307

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

statement of fact; even if Newton himself were to jump
from the third floor balcony of his house, the gravitational
force would indeed, act upon him also! There is an
inevitability in nature's laws. Man is free to choose
freedom or bondage. The path of freedom is described
above, and in this open and sincere statement, the Lord is
only showing great anxiety, not to mince matters, but to
be callously frank in His expressions.
Guidance to this true "way-of-life" always comes to us
from the depth of our nature, expressed in the language of
"the soft, small voice of the within." But man's ego and
ego-centric desires force him to disobey the ringing voice
of the Lord and such a one pursues a life of base vulgarity,
seeking sense-gratification and ultimately bringing
himself down to be punished by his own uncontrolled
emotions and unchastened ideas. Hence the warning:
"YOU SHALL PERISH."
TO WEAVE THE IDEA INTO THE VERY WARP AND
WOOF OF ARJUNA'S LIFE, THE LORD SAYS:
59. Filled with egoism, if you think, "I will not fight, " vain in
this, your resolve; (for) nature will compel you.
General statements of truth are too volatile to be retained
in one's understanding permanently. But the general
statements of life's principles, when woven into the
texture of one's own experiences, remain as one's own
1308

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

earned "knowledge," and they become permanent
WISDOM. Therefore, Krishna is trying to bring the
philosophical contents of his discourse into the very
substance of Arjuna's own immediate problem.
If, due to a sense of self-importance, the self-conceited
Arjuna were to think "I WILL NOT FIGHT," he shall be
thinking so in vain! The temperament of Arjuna must seek
its expression, and being a Kshatriya of "passionate"
nature, his Rajoguna will assert itself; "NATURE WILL
COMPEL YOU." One who has eaten salt must feel terribly
thirsty, ere long. The false arguments raised by Arjuna for
not fighting the battle are all compromises made by his
ego with the situation which he is compelled to face in the
crush of events around him.
Even if he were to follow his temporary attitude of
escapism and desist from fighting, it is a law of nature that
his mental temperament would assert itself at a later
period, when, alas! he may not have the field to express
himself in and exhaust his vasanas.
ALSO BECAUSE OF THE FOLLOWING REASON, "YOU
MUST FIGHT."
60. O son of Kunti, bound by your own KARMA (action) born
of your own nature, that which, through delusion you wish not
to do, even that you shall do, helplessly.
1309

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Continuing, the Lord, in effect, says: "I am asking you to
fight, not because I have no personal sympathies for you,
but because that is the only course left for you. You have
no other choice. Though you now insist that you "WILL
NOT FIGHT," it is merely an illusion. You will have to
fight, because, your nature will assert itself."
The actions, we do, are propelled by our own vaasanaas
and they shackle our personality. Arjuna is essentially of
the Rajoguna type, and therefore, he must fight. The
Pandava Prince cannot, all of a sudden, pose to have the
beauties of the Sattwic nature of heart and retire to a
solitary place to live a serene life of steady contemplation
and come to experience the consequent self-unfoldment.
Because of wrong thinking and miscalculations, Arjuna
feels that he does not like war, and therefore, he is not
ready to face it. But in spite of his determination, he will
be compelled to fight by his own nature, ordered by the
existing vasanas in him. This is the irrevocable law of life.
He who has no control over his mind becomes a victim of
circumstances. He gets thrown up and down by the whim
and fancy of things around him. But he who gains inner
mastery over the mind and stands firmly rooted and
unshaken by the circumstances is the one who will revel
(Rati) in the Pure Light (Bhaa) of wisdom; and the country
that recognises this culture has acquired its immortal
name 'Bhaarata.'
1310

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In the previous two or three stanzas, we are told by
Krishna, "REMEMBER ME CONSTANTLY." What does
this mean? How should we remember? Does it mean
meditating upon the Lord? What should be our
relationship with Him? Are we to remember Him as a
historical event, or remember Him as intimately connected
with us as a 'Presence' expressing Itself at all times in and
through us?
ALL THESE QUESTIONS ARE APT TO RISE UP IN THE
MIND OF ANY SERIOUS STUDENT. THEY ARE
ANSWERED IN THE FOLLOWING:
61. The Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings, O Arjuna,
causing all beings, by His illusive power, to revolve, as if
mounted on a machine.
The advice given by the Lord is clear and beyond all
shades of doubt. "Remember the Lord," says the
Geetaacharaya, "as the One who organises, controls and
directs all things in the world and without Whose
command nothing ever happens. In His 'presence' alone
everything can happen --- therefore remember Him as
Ishwara." The steam functioning in the cylinder of the
engine is the "Lord" of the engine, and without it the
piston can never move. It is the steam which provides the
locomotion and renders the train dynamic.

1311

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Do not remember the Lord as merely a personified Power,
as Shiva in Kailasha, as Vishnu in Vaikuntha, as the Father in
Heaven etc., but recognise Him as one who dwells in the
heart of EVERY CREATURE. Just as the address of a
person is given, in order that the seeker of that person
may locate the individual in a busy town, so also in order
to seek, discover and identify with the Lord, His "Local
address" is being provided here by Bhagawan Krishna!
When we say that "THE LORD DWELLS IN THE HEART
OF ALL LIVING BEINGS," we do not mean the physical
heart. In philosophy the use of the word "heart" is more
figurative than literal.
RESIDING THUS IN THE HEART --- meaning, in the
mind of one who has cultivated the divine qualities such
as love, kindness, patience, cheer, affection, tenderness,
forgiveness, charity etc. The Lord lends His Power to all
living creatures to act on. He energizes everyone.
Everything revolves around Him --- like the unseen hand
that manipulates the dolls in the marionette-play. The
puppets have no existence, no vitality, no emotions of
their own; they are only the expressions of the will and
intention of the unseen hand behind them.
It is not the matter in us that moves or becomes conscious
of the world of transactions; or else the cucumber and the
pumpkin, the corn and the tomato of which our bodies are
made, will also have locomotion or Consciousness. When
the same vegetables are consumed as food and are
1312

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

digested and assimilated to become part of our physical
body, the matter, in contact with the Life-Principle in us
becomes vibrant and dynamic, capable of perceiving,
feeling and thinking. The Spark-of-Life presiding over the
body, the Pure Eternal Consciousness, is that which, as it
were, vitalises inert matter. Pure Consciousness in itself
does not act; but in Its Presence the matter envelopments
get vitalised, and then they SEEM to act.
The Atman, conditioned by the body, mind and intellect,
expresses dynamism and action, and creates what we
recognise as the manifested individuality. "The Supreme
functioning through the total bodies as the cause of all
action" is called Ishwara. Life functioning in each one of us
is the master, the controller, the director and the Lord of
our individual activities.
The essential Life in all of us is one and the same;
therefore, the Total Life functions through and manifests
as the entire universe, energising all existing equipments.
Thus expressing through all activities, is the Lord of the
Universe, Ishwara. With this understanding, if you read
the stanza again, you will comprehend the metaphor
employed herein.
IF THERE BE THUS A LORD WITHIN, MEANING A
POWER THAT RULES OVER AND GUIDES ALL MY
ACTIVITIES, WHAT ARE MY RESPONSIBILITIES AND
DUTIES TOWARDS HIM?
1313

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

62. Fly unto Him for refuge with all your being, O Bharata; by
His grace you shall obtain Supreme Peace (and) the Eternal
Abode.
Such an elaborate description has been given of the
Spiritual Presence which vitalises the world-of-matter
around man, only to bring about ultimately an
evolutionary self-development in the student. The very
core of this Geeta-philosophy is the theme that is indicated
in the opening stanza of the 'Ishaavasya Upanishad.' "The
Infinite Truth pervades everything in the world, and
therefore, renouncing all the multiplicity, enjoy the
Infinitude, and covet not anybody's wealth."
Recognition of the body through our abject identifications
with it, creates a false sense of individuality, and it is this
"ego" that suffers and sighs.
The one commandment that has been repeated all through
the Divine Song with great insistence is: "Renounce the
ego and act." The ego is the cause for all our sense of
imperfections and sorrows. To the extent we liquidate this
sense of separateness and individuality, to that extent we
climb into an experience of greater perfection and joy
within ourselves.
Krishna has been advising surrender of the "ego" unto the
Lord by developing a devoted attitude of dedication.
Arjuna, like a true intelligent sceptic, asks: "To which Lord
1314

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

should I renounce all my action? --- and dedicate all my
activities at which altar? Krishna has defined the Infinite
Lord in the previous verse, and now, here He advises
Arjuna to surrender his "ego" unto HIM. "FLY UNTO HIM
FOR REFUGE WITH ALL YOUR WILL."
Ours is an age of scepticism. The Arjuna of the Geeta is
rather like a typical representative of our own age in this
respect. A sceptic is one who questions the existing beliefs;
he wants to be intellectually convinced of the logical
grounds upon which the existing beliefs stand.
Earlier, Krishna has explained to Arjuna what is indicated
by the term Ishwara. Now the call of the Geeta to Arjuna is
to surrender himself unto the Lord. The Geeta requires all
of us to live and act with our hearts resting in selfdedicated surrender to the Consciousness, the harmonious
oneness of Life that pulsates everywhere through all
equipments. In short, we are asked to identify ourselves
with the Spirit rather than the vehicles of Its expression.
He who has thus surrendered totally (Sarva-bhaavena)
gains an intellect fully awakened, and thereafter, external
circumstances cannot toss and crush his individuality.
The body and mind of such an individual who has learnt
ever to keep the refreshing memory of the present cannot
make any foolish demands. And when one brings such a
brilliant intellect into the affairs of life, all his problems
wither away and carpet his path to strive progressively
ahead.
1315

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

To the extent we identify ourselves with Him, to that
extent His light and power become ours, and they are
called "His Grace" (Prasaada). Ere long, as a result of this
"grace" accumulated within, through the integration of the
personality and constant surrender of the ego, the
individual shall obtain "THE SUPREME PEACE, THE
ETERNAL RESTING PLACE."
WITH ALL ONE'S BEING (Sarva-bhaavena) --- This
surrender unto the Lord should not be a temporary selfdeception. We must grow into a consciousness of the
Presence of the Divine in all the planes of our existence. To
illustrate such a total devotion, we have the examples of
Radha, Hanuman, Prahlada, and others. Without bringing
all the levels of our being, and all the facets of our
personality, into our love for Him, we cannot drown our
finite ego-sense into the joyous lap of the Infinite Lord.
Thus, a true devotee must re-orientate his being and must
surrender himself as a willing vehicle for His expression.
Then and then alone, all the delusions end, and the mortal
gains divine experience, and comes to live fully the State
of Immortality of the Godhood.
IN CONCLUSION KRISHNA ADDS:
63. Thus, the "Wisdom" which is a greater secret than all
secrets, has been declared to you by Me; having reflected upon it
fully, you now act as you choose.
1316

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

This can be considered as THE CLOSING VERSE of the
Geeta discourses on the battle-field of Kurukshetra. The
word "thus" (Iti) is generally used in Sanskrit to indicate
what we mean nowadays, by the phrase "quotation
closes." The Lord has ended His discourses here.
A GREATER SECRET THAN ALL SECRETS (GuhyaatGuhyataram) --- A secret can be so called only as long as it
is not divulged. The moment we come to know of a thing
it is no longer a secret at all. The spiritual truth and the
right way-of-living as discussed in the Geeta are termed as
"THE SECRET OF ALL SECRETS" in the sense that it is
not easy for one to know the Geeta way of dynamic life
and the Geeta vision-of-Truth, unless one is initiated into
them. Even a subtle intellect, very efficient in knowing the
material world, both in its arrangement of things and their
mutual interaction, must necessarily fail to feel the
Presence of this Subtle, Eternal and Infinite Self.
Guhyam --- This is a term that has gone into much misuse
and abuse in India in our recent past. The term was
misconstrued to mean that the spiritual knowledge, which
is the core of our culture, is a great secret to be carefully
preserved and jealously guarded by the privileged few
against anybody else coming to learn it. This orthodox
view has no sanction in the scriptures if we read them
with the same large-heartedness of the Rishis who gave
them to us. No doubt, there are persons who have not the
intellectual vision, nor the mental steadiness, nor the
physical discipline to understand correctly this great
1317

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Truth in all its subtle implications, and therefore, this is
kept away from them lest they should come to harm
themselves by falsely living a misunderstood philosophy.
REFLECT OVER IT ALL --- Any amount of listening
cannot make one gain in "wisdom." The knowledge
gained through reading or listening must be assimilated
and brought within the warp and the woof of our
understanding; then alone can knowledge become
wisdom. Therefore, Arjuna is asked not to tamely accept
Krishna's Song of Life as truth, but he has been asked to
independently think over all that the Lord has declared.
To put the ideas between the mind and the intellect and to
chew them properly is "reflection." Each one will have to
get his own individual confirmation from his own bosom.
HEREAFTER ACT AS YOU PLEASE --- Krishna
ultimately leaves the decision to act, the will to live the
higher life, to Arjuna's own choice. Each one must reach
the Lord by his own free choice. There is no compulsion;
for, spontaneity is an invaluable requisite for all new
births. Having placed before him all the facts and figures
of life, principles and methods of living, Krishna rightly
invites Arjuna to make his own independent decision after
considering all these points. Spiritual teachers should
never compel. And in India there has never been any form
of indoctrination.

1318

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DEVOTION TO THE LORD IS THE SECRET OF
SUCCESS IN "KARMA YOGA." THIS IS EXPLAINED IN
THE FOLLOWING:
64. Hear again My supreme word, most secret of all; because
you are dearly beloved of Me, therefore, I will tell you what is
good (for you) .
When the Lord has concluded His entire discourse with
the words, "THE WISDOM HAS BEEN DECLARED BY
ME; NOW DO AS YOU PLEASE," Arjuna, who has been
all along devotedly and attentively listening to the
expounded philosophy, seems to register an expression of
confusion on his face. Arjuna wants to get some more
instructions. The Pandava Prince, perhaps, feels that he
has not fully assimilated the deep and intimate
philosophy of life as expounded by the Lord. Therefore,
Krishna continues, "AGAIN I WILL REPEAT THE
PROFOUNDEST 'WISDOM'; PLEASE, ARJUNA, LISTEN
ONCE AGAIN TO THIS SUPREME 'WISDOM'."
The motive force behind every teacher coming out into the
world to preach, to explain and to expound, is his
abundant love for mankind. Krishna repeats here the
salient factors of his philosophical goal and the means of
realising it, to Arjuna, "BECAUSE YOU ARE DEARLY
BELOVED OF ME," meaning "YOU ARE MY FAST
FRIEND." For this reason, Krishna tries to recapitulate his
scheme of right living and noble endeavour in brief.
1319

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Arjuna is by temperament a soldier; and a soldier's
intellect has no patience with a dialectical discourse. What
he can best appreciate is only a cut-and-dried order
shouted at him, and he has been trained by his vocation
always to follow it implicitly. Arjuna is expecting Krishna
to recast the whole philosophy into a precise, definite,
decisive commandment. Understanding this silent
demand of the soldier's heart, Krishna promises here that
He shall now declare the truth which is "the most secret of
all" (Sarva-guhya-tamam).
WHAT IS IT?
65. Fix your mind upon Me; be devoted to Me; sacrifice for Me;
bow down to Me; you shall come, surely then, to Me alone; truly
do I promise to you, (for) you are dear to Me.
Four conditions are laid down for a successful seeker; and
to those who have accomplished them all in themselves,
an assurance of realisation, "YOU SHALL REACH ME," is
given here. When a philosophy is summarised and
enumerated in a few points, it has a deceptive look of
utter simplicity, and a student is apt to take it lightly, or
ignore it IN TOTO. In order to avoid such a mistake, the
teacher invariably endorses his statement that it is indeed
all Truth: I PROMISE YOU TRULY."
To add a punch to this personal endorsement, Krishna
guarantees the motive behind His discourses: "YOU ARE
1320

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DEAR TO ME." Love is the correct motive force behind all
spiritual teachings. Unless a teacher has infinite love for
the taught there is no inspired joy in teaching; a
professional teacher is, at best, only a wage earner. He can
neither inspire the student nor, while teaching, come to
experience within himself the joyous ecstasy of
satisfaction and fulfilment, which are the true rewards of
teaching.
A substantial part of the philosophy and the "path"
declared herein have already been taught in an earlier
chapter (IX-34). And the same thing is repeated here with
the endorsement that what He is declaring is no pleasant
compromise but the total unadulterated truth.
WITH THE MIND FIXED ON ME --- Meaning "ever
remembering Me, ever devotedly identifying with Me"
through the process of dedicating all your activities unto
Me, in an attitude of reverence unto the All-pervading
Life, if you work in the service of the world, the promise is
that you will reach the Supreme Goal.
In all other religions the Goal is other than the Prophet;
only in the Geeta the Supreme Himself is advising the
seeker, and therefore He has to declare: "YOU WILL
REACH ME."
Looking up to Vaasudeva alone as your aim, means and
end, "you shall reach Me." Knowing that the Lord's
declarations are true, and being convinced that liberation
1321

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

is a necessary result of devotion to the Lord, one should
look up to the Lord as the highest and the sole refuge.
The maladjusted "ego" in us has, by its own false concepts
and imaginations, spooled us all up into cocoons of
confusion and has tied us down with our own self-created
shackles. Now, it is up to us to snap these cords that bind
us and gain freedom from them all. The All-perfect
Supreme has been as though shackled by our mind and
intellect, and now the same mind and intellect must be
utilised to unwind the binding cords. If we lock ourselves
up in a room, it is left to us only to unlock its doors and
walk out into freedom. Vaasanaas are created by our egocentric activities (Sa-kaama-Karma) and by self-less work
(Nish-kaama-Karma) alone can these vaasanaas be ended.
Therefore, Krishna advises us: "Act on with mind fixed on
Me. Devotedly work for Me. Dedicate all your activities as
a sacrifice, as an offering unto Me."
An attitude of reverence to the Supreme is necessary in
order to re-incorporate into the texture of our own life, the
qualities of the Supreme. Like water, knowledge also
flows only from a higher to a lower level. Therefore, our
minds must be in an attitude of surrender to Him in utter
reverence and devotion.
When you work in the world with such an attitude,
Krishna says, "YOU SHALL REACH THE SUPREME."

1322

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

ACCORDING TO SHANKARA, "HAVING TAUGHT, IN
CONCLUSION, THAT THE SUPREME SECRET OF
KARMA YOGA IS IN REGARDING THE LORD AS THE
SOLE REFUGE, KRISHNA NOW PROCEEDS TO SPEAK
OF THE INFINITE KNOWLEDGE, THE FRUIT OF
KARMA YOGA, AS TAUGHT IN THE ESSENTIAL
PORTIONS OF ALL THE UPANISHADS":
66. Abandoning all DHARMAS, (of the body, mind, and
intellect) , take refuge in Me alone; I will liberate thee from all
sins; grieve not.
This is the noblest of all the stanzas in the Divine Song and
this is yet the most controversial. Translators, reviewers,
critics and commentators have invested all their
originality in commenting upon this stanza, and various
philosophers, each maintaining his own point of view, has
ploughed the words to plant his ideas into the ample
bosom of this great verse of brilliant import. To Sri
Ramanuja, this is the final verse (Charama-Shloka) of the
whole Geeta.
Most often used, and yet in no two places having the same
shade of suggestion, the term, 'Dharma'has become the
very heart of the Hindu culture. This explains why the
religion of India was called by the people who lived in the
land and enjoyed its spiritual wealth as the 'Sanatana
Dharma.'
1323

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Dharma, as used in our scriptures is, to put it directly and
precisely, "THE LAW OF BEING." That because of which
a THING continues to be the THING itself, without which
the THING cannot continue to be that THING, is the
Dharma of the THING. Heat, because of which fire
maintains itself as fire, without which fire can no more be
fire, is the Dharma of fire. Heat is the Dharma of fire; cold
fire we have yet to come across! Sweetness is the Dharma
of sugar; sour sugar is a myth!
Every object in the world has two types of properties: (a)
the essential, and (b) the non-essential. A substance can
remain itself, intact, when its "non-essential" qualities are
absent, but it cannot remain ever for a split moment
without its "essential" property. The colour of the flame,
the length and width of the tongues of flame, are all the
"non-essential" properties of fire, but the essential
property of it is heat. This essential property of a
substance is called its Dharma.
Then what exactly is the Dharma of man? The colour of the
skin, the innumerable endless varieties of emotions and
thoughts --- the nature, the conditions and the capacities
of the body, mind and intellect --- are the "non-essential"
factors in the human personality, as against the Touch of
Life, the Divine Consciousness, expressed through them
all. Without the Atman man cannot exist; it is TRUTH
which is the basis of existence. Therefore, the "essential
Dharma" of man is the Divine Spark of Existence, the
Infinite Lord.
1324

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

With this understanding of the term Dharma, we shall
appreciate its difference from mere ethical and moral rules
of conduct, all duties in life, all duties towards relations,
friends, community, nation and the world, all our
obligations to our environment, all our affections,
reverence, charity, and sense of goodwill --- all that have
been considered as our Dharma in our books. In and
through such actions, physical, mental and intellectual, a
man will bring forth the expression of his true Dharma --his Divine Status as the All-pervading Self. To live truly as
the Atman, and to express Its Infinite Perfection through
all our actions and in all our contacts with the outer world
is to rediscover our Dharma.
There are, no doubt, a few other stanzas in the Geeta
wherein the Lord has almost directly commanded us to
live a certain way-of-life, and has promised that if we obey
His instructions, He will directly take the responsibility of
guiding us towards HIS OWN BEING. But nowhere has
the Lord so directly and openly expressed His divine
willingness to undertake the service of His devotee as in
this stanza.
He wants the meditator to accomplish three distinct
adjustments in his inner personality. They are: (1)
Renounce all Dharmas through meditation; (2) surrender
to My refuge alone; and while in the state of meditation,
(3) stop all worries. And as a reward Lord Krishna
promises: "I SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS."
This is a promise given to all mankind. The Geeta is a
1325

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

universal scripture; it is the Bible of Man, the Koran of
Humanity, the dynamic scripture of the Hindus.
ABANDONING
ALL
DHARMA
(Sarva-Dharman
Parityajya) --- As we have said above, Dharma is "the law
of being," and we have already noted that nothing can
continue its existence when once it is divorced from its
Dharma. And yet, Krishna says, "COME TO MY REFUGE,
AFTER RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS." Does it then
mean that our definition of Dharma is wrong? Or is there a
contradiction in this stanza? Let us see.
As a mortal, finite ego, the seeker is living, due to his
identification with them, the Dharmas of his body, mind
and intellect, and exists in life as a mere perceiver, feeler,
and thinker. The perceiver-feeler-thinker personality in us
is the "individuality" which expresses itself as the "ego."
These are not our 'essential' Dharmas. And since these are
the 'non-essentials,' "RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS"
means "ENDING THE EGO."
"To renounce" therefore means "not to allow ourselves to
fall again and again into this state of identification with
the outer envelopments of matter around us." Extrovert
tendencies of the mind are to be renounced. "Develop
introspection diligently" is the deep suggestion in the
phrase "RENOUNCING ALL DHARMAS."
COME TO ME ALONE FOR SHELTER (Mam-ekam
Sharanam Vraja) --- Self-withdrawal from our extrovert
1326

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

nature will be impossible unless the mind is given a
positive method of developing its introvert attention. By
single-pointed, steady contemplation upon Me, the Self,
which is the One-without-a-second, we can successfully
accomplish our total withdrawal from the misinterpreting
equipments of the body, mind and intellect.
Philosophers in India were never satisfied with a negative
approach in their instructions; there are more DO's than
DONTS with them. This practical nature of our
philosophy, which is native to our traditions, is amply
illustrated in this stanza when Lord Krishna commands
His devotees to come to His shelter whereby they can
accomplish the renunciation of all their false
identifications.
BE NOT GRIEVED (Maa shuchah) --- When both the above
conditions are accomplished, the seeker reaches a state of
growing tranquillity in meditation. But it will all be a
waste if this subjective peace, created after so much
labour, were not to form a steady and firm platform for
his personality to spring forth from, into the realms of the
Divine Consciousness. The spring-board must stay under
our feet, supply the required propulsion for our inward
dive. But unfortunately, the very anxiety to reach the
Infinite weakens the platform. Like a dream-bridge, it
disappears at the withering touch of the anxieties in the
meditator. During meditation, when the mind has been
persuaded away from all its restless preoccupations with
the outer vehicles, and brought, again and again, to
1327

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

contemplate upon the Self, the Infinite, Lord Krishna
wants the seeker to renounce all his "ANXIETIES TO
REALISE." Even a desire to realise is a disturbing thought
that can obstruct the final achievement.
I SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS --- That which
brings about agitations in the bosom and thereby causes
dissipation of the energies is called "sin." The actions
themselves can cause subtle exhaustions of the human
power, as no action can be undertaken without bringing
our mind and intellect into it. In short, the mind and
intellect will always have to come and control every
action. Actions thus leave their "foot prints," as it were,
upon the mental stuff, and these marks which channelise
the thought-flow and shape the psychological personality,
when our mind has gone through its experiences, are
called vasanas.
Good vasanas bring forth a steady stream of good thoughts
as efficiently as bad vasanas erupt bad thoughts. As long as
thoughts are flowing, the mind survives --- whether good
or bad. To erase all vasanas completely is to stop all
thoughts i. e. the total cessation of thought-flow viz.
"mind." Transcending the mind-intellect-equipment is to
reach the plane of Pure Consciousness, the KrishnaReality.
As a seeker renounces more and more of his
identifications with his outer envelopments through a
process of steady contemplation and meditation upon the
1328

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Lord of his heart, he grows in his vision. In the newly
awakened sensitive consciousness, he becomes more and
more poignantly aware of the number of vasanas he has to
exhaust. "BE NOT GRIEVED," assures the Lord, for, "I
SHALL RELEASE YOU FROM ALL SINS" --- the
disturbing, thought-gurgling, action-prompting, desirebreeding, agitation-brewing vasanas, the "sins."
The stanza is important inasmuch as it is one of the most
powerfully worded verses in the Geeta wherein the Lord,
the Infinite, personally undertakes to do something
helpful for the seeker in case the spiritual hero in him is
ready to offer his ardent co-operation and put forth his
best efforts. All through the days of seeking, a Saadhaka
can assure himself steady progress in spirituality only
when he is able to keep within himself a salubrious mental
climate of warm optimism. To despair and to weep, to feel
dejected and disappointed, is to invite restlessness of the
mind, and naturally, therefore, spiritual unfoldment is
never in the offing. The stanza, in its deep imports and
wafting suggestions, is indeed a peroration in itself of the
entire philosophical poem.
HAVING CONCLUDED THE ENTIRE DOCTRINE OF
THE "GEETA-SHASTRA" IN THIS DISCOURSE, AND
HAVING ALSO BRIEFLY AND CONCLUSIVELY
RESTATED THE DOCTRINE IN ORDER TO IMPRESS IT
MORE FIRMLY, THE LORD NOW PROCEEDS TO
STATE THE RULE THAT SHOULD BE BORNE IN MIND
WHILE IMPARTING THIS KNOWLEDGE TO OTHERS:
1329

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

67. This is never to be spoken by you to one who is devoid of
austerities or devotion, nor to one who does not render service,
nor to one who desires not to listen, nor to one who cavils at Me.
In almost all scriptural texts we find, in their closing
stanzas, a description of the type of students to whom this
knowledge can be imparted. Following faithfully this
great tradition, here also we have this enumeration of the
necessary qualifications for a true student of the Geeta.
These are not so many fortresses raised round the
treasure-house of the Geeta in order to protect some
interests and provide some people with a kind of
monopoly in trading upon the wealth of ideas in these
discourses. On the other hand, we shall find that these
qualifications are essential adjustments in the inner
personality of the student. And a bosom so tuned up is the
right vehicle that can daringly invest that knowledge in
living one's life and thus earn the joy-of-' wisdom.'
THOSE WHO DO NOT LIVE AN AUSTERE LIFE --Those who do not have any control over their body and
mind; who have dissipated their physical and mental
energies in the wrong direction and have thus become
impotent bodily, mentally and intellectually --- to them
"NEVER IS THIS TO BE SPOKEN BY YOU"; for, it will not
be beneficial to them. There is not a trace of prejudice in
this stanza. It is equivalent to saying "please do not sow
seeds upon rocks," for, the sower will never be able to
reap, as nothing can grow on rocks.
1330

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

THOSE WHO HAVE NO DEVOTION --- That is, those
who do not have the capacity to identify themselves with
the ideal that they want to reach. If one cannot sympathise
with an ideal one can much less absorb or assimilate it. An
ideal, however well understood intellectually, cannot
yield its full benefit unless it is expressed in life. To hug on
to the ideal, in a clasp of love, is devotion.
THOSE WHO DO NOT RENDER SERVICE --- We have
seen earlier, almost in all chapters, Krishna again and
again insisting that selfless activity is not only a means for
the Saadhaka, but it is at once also the field where the
perfect masters discover their fulfilment. Seekers who are
not able to serve others, who are selfish, who have no
human qualities, who have never felt a sympathetic love
for others --- such persons are merely consumers and not
producers of joy for others, and they invariably fail to
understand or appreciate or come to live the joys of the
Krishna way-of-life.
THOSE WHO CAVIL AT ME --- Those who murmur
against Me. If we do not respect and revere our teacher we
can never learn from him. The first person singular used
in the Geeta is identical with the Self, the Goal, and
therefore, it means, "those who are not able to respect
philosophy." Forceful conversion may enhance the
numerical strength of a faith, but self-development and
inner unfoldment cannot come that way. Religion should
not be forced upon anyone. One who has mentally
rejected a philosophy can never, even when one has
1331

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

understood it, live up to it. Therefore, those who are
entertaining a secret disrespect for a philosophy should
NOT BE FORCED to study it.
Stanzas like this in a Shastra are meant as instructions for
the students on how to attune themselves properly so that
they can make a profitable study of the Shastra. None
should expect an immediate result from his study of the
Geeta. Personality readjustments cannot be made
overnight. There is no miracle promised in the Geeta.
Indirectly, the stanza also gives some sane instructions by
its suggestions. If a student feels that he cannot
satisfactorily understand the Geeta, he has only to sharpen
his inner nature further by the above subjective processes.
Just as we cleanse a mirror to remove the dimness of the
reflection, so too, by properly readjusting the mindintellect-equipment, its sensitivity to absorb the Geetaphilosophy can be increased.
NOW THE LORD PROCEEDS TO STATE WHAT
BENEFITS WILL ACCRUE TO HIM WHO HANDS
DOWN HIS KNOWLEDGE TO OTHERS IN SOCIETY:
68. He who, with supreme devotion to Me, will teach this
supreme secret to My devotees, shall doubtless come to Me.
The stanza under review and the following one are both
glorifications of a teacher who can give the correct
1332

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

interpretation of the Geeta and make the listener follow
the Krishna way-of-life. "Fight the evil down, whether it
be within or without" is the cardinal principle that Krishna
advocates to Prince Arjuna. In order to impart such a
culture, it is not enough that the teacher be a mere scholar,
but he must have the Krishna-ability. Hence the
glorification. The Lord's Song has a special appeal to those
who have the mysterious spiritual thirst to live a fuller
and more dynamic life. Hence it is said: "This deeply
profound philosophy" (Paramam Guhyam) must be
imparted to "My devotees" (Mad-bhakteshu). Devotion to
the Lord (Bhakti) means the capacity to identify with the
ideal, and therefore, the philosophy of the ideal way-oflife can profitably be imparted only to those persons who
have a capacity to identify themselves with the ideal and
thereafter live up to it.
It is not sufficient that the student alone has this capacity
to identify himself with the higher ideal, but the teacher
also must have (Bhakti) "perfect attunement" with the
Supreme Krishna-Reality. Such an individual, who is
himself rooted in his attunement, and who tries to impart
this knowledge to others and thereby constantly occupies
himself in reflections upon the philosophical ideals of the
Geeta --- "shall certainly (Asamshayah) come to Me alone."
An educated man should, in his gratitude, feel much
indebted to the Muse-of-Wisdom. In fact, this
indebtedness is actually called, in our tradition, Rishiindebtedness (Rishi-Rinam), to absolve ourselves from
1333

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

which, we are asked to study their works and preach their
ideas everyday.
Philosophy is the basis of every culture. The Hindu
culture can revive and assert its glory only when it is
nurtured and nourished by the philosophy of India which
is contained in the Upanishads. The fathers of our culture,
the great Rishis, knowing this secret, urged the students of
the Scriptures not to keep this knowledge to themselves,
but to impart it freely to others. In this way alone the
culture can be successfully brought into the dim-lit
chambers of people's lives.
If a student, who has understood even a wee bit of our
cultural tradition, does not convey it to others, it means
that there is no mobility of intelligence or fluidity of
inspiration in him. He who is thus capable of conveying
the truths of the Geeta to others is complimented here
with the promise of the highest reward: "HE SHALL
DOUBTLESS COME TO ME."
NOT ONLY THIS, BUT THE LORD EXPRESSES THAT
HE LOVES SUCH A TEACHER MUCH MORE THAN
ANYBODY ELSE:
69. Nor is there any among men who does dearer service to Me,
nor shall there be another on earth dearer to Me than he.

1334

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Krishna again takes up, in this stanza, the glorification of
the teacher who teaches the Geeta-knowledge. Herein,
Krishna explains how such a man can reach Him easily, as
declared in the previous verse. The Geetaacharya
emphasises that such an individual is "DEAREST TO MY
HEART, AS I FIND NONE EQUAL TO HIM IN THE
WORLD." Not only is there none to compare with him
amongst the present generation, but there SHALL never
be (Bhavita-Na-Cha) anyone, even in future times, so dear
to Him, the Lord says, as such an individual who spends
his time in spreading the knowledge of what little he has
understood from the Geeta.
Earlier, in the Geeta, a great psychological truth has been
hinted at, which is often repeated throughout the entire
length of the Divine Song, and this cardinal secret is that
he who can bring his entire mind to the contemplation of
the Divine, to the total exclusion of all dissimilar thoughtcurrents, will come to experience the Infinite Divine. A
student of the Geeta who is spending his time in serious
studies and in deep reflection upon them, and in
preaching what he has understood, comes to revere the
knowledge and thus reach an identification with an inner
peace that is the essence of truth. Therefore, Krishna says:
"THERE CAN NEVER BE ANY OTHER MAN MORE
DEAR TO ME THAN SUCH A PREACHER; FOR, HE IS
DOING THE GREATEST SERVICE TO ME BY
EARNESTLY AND DEVOTEDLY TRYING TO CONVEY
THE IMMORTAL PRINCIPLES EXPOUNDED IN THE
GEETA."
1335

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

It is not necessary in this context, that we must first
ourselves become masters of the entire Geeta-Knowledge.
Whatever one has understood one must immediately,
with an anxious love, give out to those who are
completely ignorant. Also, one must sincerely and
honestly try to live the principles in one's own life --"SUCH A MAN IS DEAREST TO ME."
NOT ONLY THE PREACHER BUT EVEN THE SINCERE
STUDENT IS CONGRATULATED IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA:
70. And he who will study this sacred dialogue of ours, by him I
shall have been worshipped by the "sacrifice-of-wisdom, " such
is My conviction.
Having thus glorified all teachers of the Geeta who carry
the "Wisdom-of-the-sacred-discourse" to the masses, the
Geeta, here, is glorifying even the students who are
studying this Sacred text of the Lord's Song. The great
philosophy of life given out here as a conversation
between Krishna --- the Infinite, and Arjuna --- the finite,
has such a compelling charm about it, that even those who
read it superficially will also be slowly dragged into the
very sanctifying depths of it. Such an individual is, even
unconsciously, egged on to make a pilgrimage to the
greater possibilities within himself, and naturally, he
comes to evolve through what Krishna terms here as
"Jnaana Yajna."
1336

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

In a Yajna, Lord Fire is invoked in the sacrificial trough
and into it are offered oblations by the devotees. From this
analogy, the term Jnaana Yajna has been originally coined
and used in the Geeta. Study of the Scriptures and regular
contemplation upon their deep significances kindle the
"Fire-of-Knowledge" in us and into this the intelligent
seeker offers, as his oblation, his own false values and
negative tendencies. This is the significance of the
metaphorical phrase Jnaana Yajna. Therefore, here the
Lord admits but a truth in the Spiritual science when He
declares that those who study the Geeta --- contemplate
upon its meaning, understand it thoroughly --- and those
who can, at the altars of their well-kindled understanding,
sacrifice their own ego-centric misconceptions about
themselves, and about the world around them, are
certainly the greatest devotees of the Infinite.
When a rusted key is heated in fire, the rust falls off and
the key regains its original brightness. So too, our
personality, when reacted with the knowledge of the
Geeta, is chastened, since our wrong tendencies,
unhealthy vasanas and false sense-of-ego which have risen
from false-knowledge (Ajnaana), all get burnt up in RightKnowledge (Jnaana).
AFTER THUS EXPLAINING THE GLORY OF THE
TEACHER AND THE BENEFITS OF THE STUDY SO
FAR, KRISHNA INDICATES IN THE FOLLOWING
STANZA, THAT EVEN "LISTENING" TO THE GEETA
DISCOURSES IS BENEFICIAL:
1337

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

71. That man also, who hears this, full of faith and free from
malice, he too, liberated, shall attain to the happy worlds of those
righteous deeds.
A student of the Geeta cannot stand apart from his text
book, and merely learn to appreciate the theme of the
Lord's Song. An all-out, ardent wooing of the Geeta by the
student at all levels is necessary, if the study of the Geeta
is really to fulfil the student's spiritual unfoldment.
Consequently, Krishna indicates here two conditions,
fulfilling which alone can one profitably listen to the
Geeta discourses and hope to gather a large dividend of
joy and perfection.
ONE OF FAITH (Shraddhaavaan) --- The term Shraddhaa in
Sanskrit, though usually translated as "faith," actually
means much more than what it indicates in the English
language and in the Western tradition. Shraddha has been
defined as "that faculty in the human intellect which gives
it the capacity to dive deep into and discover the subtler
meaning of the scriptural declarations, and thus helps the
individual to absorb that understanding into the warp and
the woof of his own intellect."
Therefore, that faculty in the intellect, (1) to understand
the subtle import of the sacred words, (2) to absorb the
same, (3) to assimilate, and (4) to make the student live up
to those very same ideals, is Shraddhaa. Naturally,
listening to the Lord's discourses can be fruitful only to
1338

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

those who have developed this essential faculty in
themselves.
FREE FROM MALICE (Anasooyah) --- They alone who are
free from malice against the teachings of the Geeta can
undertake, with a healthy attitude of mind, a deeper and
detailed study of it. No doubt, Hinduism never asks any
student to read and study a philosophy with an implicit
and ready faith. But the human mind, as it is, will grow
dull and unresponsive when it has idle prejudices against
the very theme of its study.
The intellect can receive the ideals preached in the Geeta
only through the sense-organs, and these ideas must reach
the intellect, filtered through the mind. If the mind
contains any malice towards the very philosophy or the
philosopher, the arguments and the goal indicated therein
can never appeal to the student's intellect. No doubt, the
student should bring in his own constructive criticism of
an independent judgement upon what he studies, but he
must be reasonably available to listen patiently to what
the scripture has to say. In short, a student of religion
must learn to keep an open mind and not condemn the
philosophy before understanding what it has to say.
Such an individual who has attentively listened to the
Geeta, who has intellectually absorbed, and assimilated
the knowledge, "he too," says the Lord, "gets liberated"
from the present state of confusions and sorrows,
1339

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

entanglements and bondages in his personality, and
reaches a state of inner tranquillity and happiness.
JOY IS AN INSIDE JOB --- The kingdom of joy lies within
all of us. Heaven is not somewhere yonder; it is HERE
AND NOW. Happiness and sorrow are both within us. To
the extent we learn and live the principles of right living,
as enunciated in the Geeta, to that extent, we shall come to
gain a cultural eminence within ourselves and live an
ampler life of greater achievements.
It is the duty of a teacher to see that the student
understands the great Goal and the 'path' completely. If
the 'path' advised is found to be inadequate to bless the
student, it is the duty of the teacher to find out ways and
means of making the student discover his own balance.
HENCE IN THE FOLLOWING STANZA WE FIND
KRISHNA ENQUIRING WHETHER ARJUNA HAS
UNDERSTOOD WHAT HE HAS EXPOUNDED IN
THESE EIGHTEEN CHAPTERS:
72. Has this been heard, O son of Pritha, with single-pointed
mind? Has the distraction, caused by your 'ignorance, ' been
dispelled, O Dhananjaya?
Here, we find Lord Krishna, the teacher of the Geeta,
putting a leading question to his disciple, Arjuna, giving
him a chance to say how much he has benefited from the
1340

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

discourses. Of course, Krishna had no doubt about it; but
it is only like a doctor, who, confident of his own achieved
success, looks at the beaming face of the revived patient
and enquires "how are you feeling now?" This is only to
enjoy the beaming satisfaction that comes to play on the
face of the relieved patient.
HAVE YOU BEEN LISTENING WITH AN ATTENTIVE
MIND? --- The very question implies that if you have been
attentive you must have understood sufficiently the logic
in the things, beings and happenings around, and
therefore, your relationship with them also. The study of
Vedanta broadens our vision, and we start RECOGNISING, in a new light, the same OLD SCHEME-OFTHINGS around us, and then its previous ugliness gets
lifted as though by magic.
HAS YOUR DISTRACTION OF THOUGHT, CAUSED BY
'IGNORANCE,' BEEN DISPELLED? --- The false values
that we entertain distort our vision of the world and our
judgement of its affairs. The delusion of mind was
expressed by Arjuna in the opening chapters of the Geeta
(I-36 to 46, and II-4 and 5).
Amputating a septic toe to save the body is no crime; on
the contrary it is a life-giving blessing; it is not a toe
destroyed, but it is a body and its life saved. The
CULTURAL CRISIS of those times had egged the
Kauravas on to rise up in arms against the beauty of the
spiritual culture of the land. Arjuna was called upon by
1341

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

the era to champion the cause of the righteous. It was
indeed a false reading of the situation that perverted the
judgement of the Pandava Prince, as a consequence of
which he became utterly broken down, and came to
entertain a neurotic condition in himself. The fundamental
cause of all confusions was his own "NONAPPREHENSION OF REALITY" called in Vedanta
philosophy as "ignorance" (Ajnaana). When this
"ignorance" is removed by the "APPREHENSION OF
REALITY," termed as "knowledge" (Jnaana), the entire byproducts of "ignorance" are all, in one sweep, eliminated.
Hence the logic of this enquiry from the teacher.
True "knowledge" expresses itself in one's own dexterity
in action and it should fulfil itself in the splendour of its
achievements in the service of society. In case Arjuna has
understood the philosophy of the Geeta he will no more
hesitate to meet the challenges as they reach him. This
seems to be the unsaid idea in the heart of the Lord.
ARJUNA CONFESSES THAT HIS CONFUSIONS HAVE
ENDED:
Arjuna said: 73. Destroyed is my delusion, as I have now gained
my memory (knowledge) through your grace, O Achyuta. I am
firm; my doubts are gone. I will do according to your word
(bidding) .

1342

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Somewhat like one who has suddenly awakened from an
unconscious state, Arjuna, with a regained selfrecognition, assuredly confesses that his confusions have
ended --- not because he has unquestioningly swallowed
the arguments in the discourses of the Geeta, but because,
as he himself says, "I have gained a RE-COGNITION of
my Real Nature. The hero in me has now become
awakened, and the neurotic condition that had
temporarily conquered my mind has totally ended."
Such a revival within and a rediscovery of our personality
are possible for all of us if only we truly understand the
significance of the Geeta philosophy. The Infinite nature of
Perfection is our own. It is not something that we have to
gain from somewhere by the intervention of some outer
agency. This Mighty Being within ourselves is now lying
veiled beneath our own ego-centric confusions and abject
fears. Even while we are confused and confounded, and
helplessly suffering the tragic sorrows of our ego, we are
IN REALITY, none other than our own Self. When the
dream ends, the confusions also end, and we awaken to
our Real Nature. So too, in life. This awakening of the
Divine in us is the ending of the beast within.
In this new-found equilibrium, born out of Wisdom, he
experiences an unshakable balance established upon firm
foundations. All vacillations of the mind, doubts and
despairs, dejections and hesitations, fears and weaknesses
have left him (gata sandehah).
1343

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

With such a revived personality, when Arjuna reevaluates the situation, he finds no difficulty at all in
discovering what exactly his duty is. He openly declares,
"I WILL DO ACCORDING TO YOUR WORD," for in the
Geeta, Lord Krishna stands for the Divine-Spark-ofExistence manifested as "pure-intelligence."
All students --- who have thus fully understood the Geeta,
have a clear picture of the goal-of-life, who know what
'path' to follow and how to withdraw from the false bylanes of existence --- will surrender themselves, each to his
own integrated inner personality. To surrender ourselves
to our own "higher intellect" and to declare confidently
and with faith, "I SHALL DO THY BIDDING," is the
beginning and the end of all spiritual life.
SANJAYA GLORIFIES THE GEETAACHARYA AND HIS
DIVINE SONG, THE GEETA:
Sanjaya said: 74. Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue
between Vaasudeva and the high-souled Paartha, which causes
the hair to stand on end.
In the previous stanza, when one carefully understands
the full significance of the assertion made by the
rediscovered, and therefore, revived Arjuna, one cannot
avoid remembering a parallel declaration made by
another teacher of the world, when he revived from his
temporary confusion (Arjuna-sthiti). When he regained his
1344

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

spiritual balance, which he, as it were, lost temporarily
while carrying the cross through the taunting crowd, Jesus
also cried: THY WILL BE DONE." Here Arjuna, revived
by the Grace of Krishna, similarly cries, "I shall act
according to your word (Karishye Vachanam Tava)." In both
cases we find that the statements are almost identical.
Earlier, at the opening of the Geeta, the Pandava Prince
said to Govinda: "I SHALL NOT FIGHT," and became
despondent; it is the same Arjuna, now entirely revived
and fully rehabilitated, who declares: "I shall abide by Thy
will." The cure is complete and with this the Shastra also
ends.
THUS HAVE I HEARD THIS DIALOGUE BETWEEN
VAASUDEVA AND THE HIGH-SOULED ARJUNA --- In
the context of the Vyasa-literature, the conversation
between Vaasudeva, Lord Krishna, and the son of Prithaa,
Arjuna,
is but a silent mystic dialogue between the "higher" and
the "lower" in man, the "Spirit" and the "Matter."
Vaasudeva means the Lord (Deva) of the Vasus; the eight
Vasus (Ashta-vasu) together preside over Time. Therefore,
Vaasudeva, in its mystic symbolism, stands for the
Consciousness that illumines the "concept of Time"
projected by the intellect of man. In short, Vaasudeva is
the Atman, the Self. Paartha represents matter (earth)
which is capable of shedding itself, sheath by sheath to
emerge as the pure Eternal Spirit, the Supreme. This act of
1345

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

understanding himself as different from his matter
vestures is man's highest art, the Art of unveiling the
Infinite through the finite. The technique of this art is the
theme of the Geeta.
WONDERFUL (Adbhutam) --- This philosophy of the
Geeta, listened to so far by Sanjaya, is reviewed by him as
"miraculous," as "wonderful." Every philosophy, no doubt,
is a marvel of man's intellect and represents its subtle
visions and powers of comprehension. But the philosophy
of the Geeta was indeed a shade more marvellous and
wonderful to Sanjaya, because, it revived the BLASTED
personality of Arjuna into a DYNAMIC WHOLE. Because
of this practical demonstration of its powers to bless man,
the Geeta philosophy has acquired the marvellous lustre
of the rare.
It has proved, beyond all doubt, that every average
human being is endowed with potential power with
which he can easily conquer all the expressions of life in
him and command them to manifest exactly as he wants.
He is the Lord of his life, the master of the vehicles, and
not a victim of some other mightier power that has created
him, only to be endlessly teased by the whims and fancies
of his own body, mind and intellect. When this truth is
revealed, it is but human for Sanjaya, in ecstacy, to
exclaim: "Oh! what a marvellous revelation! What a
stupendous demonstration!! Adbhutam!!!"

1346

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

HIGH-SOULED PAARTHA --- In the stanza Arjuna has
been glorified and not Lord Krishna, the Parthaasaarathi.
The Pandava Prince, Arjuna, had the courage and heroism
to come out of his mental confusions, when he gained the
right knowledge from his Master's teachings. Certain acts
of a child call forth our admiration, but the same acts
performed by a grown-up person, look perhaps ridiculous
and childish. To the omnipotent Lord, the declaration of
the whole Geeta itself is but a love-play. But, for the
confused Arjuna to understand the philosophy, and
heroically walk out of his confusions is indeed an
achievement, worthy of appreciation. Thus Krishna, the
All-perfect, is almost ignored, but Arjuna, the mortal, who
has understood the art of living as expounded in the
Geeta, and has actually revived himself by living it, is
heartily congratulated and glorified!
Sanjaya's sympathies were with the Pandavas; but as an
employed minister, he was eating the salt of
Dhritarashtra, and it was not Dharma for him to be
disloyal to his master. At the same time, in the context of
the politics of that time, Dhritarashtra was, perhaps, the
only one who, even then, could stop the war.
Diplomatically, Sanjaya tries his best, in these stanzas, to
bring into the blind man's heart the suggestion of a peace
treaty. He makes the blind king understand that Lord
Krishna has revived and re-awakened the hero in Arjuna.
The blind king is reminded of what the consequences
would be: the death and disaster to his hundred children,
the pangs of separation in his old age, the dishonour of it
1347

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

all --- all these are brought home to Dhritarashtra. But the
tottering king's "blindness" seems to be not only physical
but also mental and intellectual, for Sanjaya's beseeching
moral suggestions fall on the deaf ears of the blind elder.
SANJAYA OPENLY ACKNOWLEDGES HIS INDEBTEDNESS TO SHRI VEDA-VYASA:
75. Through the grace of Vyasa I have heard, this supreme and
most secret YOGA , directly from Krishna, the Lord of YOGA,
Himself declaring it.
Before the great battle started, Vyasa had approached
Dhritarashtra to offer him the "power of vision" to witness
the war; however, the weak-hearted king had not the
courage to accept the offer. The king had then suggested
that if this power could be given to Sanjaya, the king
could, through the faithful minister, listen to a running
commentary of what was happening on the Kurukshetra
battle-field. It was thus from Vyasa that Sanjaya, sitting in
the carpeted chambers of the Kaurava palace, gained the
special faculty of witnessing all that happened and
listening to all that was said at the distant battle-field.
Grateful to Shri Veda-Vyasa for having given him this
wonderful chance of listening to this "Supreme and most
profound Yoga," Sanjaya is mentally prostrating to the
incomparable poet-sage, the author of the Mahabharata.

1348

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

DIRECTLY FROM KRISHNA HIMSELF (Yogeshwarat
Krishnat) --- The suggestion is NOT that Sanjaya had never
heard the philosophy of the Upanishads ever before, and
that the novelty of the revelation had stunned him; but
that his joy is due to the fact that he got a chance to listen
to the Eternal Knowledge of the Upanishads directly from
the Lord-of-all-Yogas, Shri Krishna Himself (Saakshaat),
from His own sacred lips.
Here also we can see how Sanjaya is sincerely trying to
make the blind Dhritarashtra realise that it is not Krishna,
the son of Devaki, nor the cowherd boy, but it is the Lord
Himself the Yogeshwarah who has revived Arjuna, and
who is serving His devotee as his charioteer. The blind
king is reminded that his children, though they have
marshalled a large army, stand doomed to destruction,
since they have to face the Infinite Lord Himself in their
enemy ranks.
THE DEEP IMPRESSION CREATED BY THIS
IRRESISTIBLE PHILOSOPHY ON THE DEVOTED
HEART OF SANJAYA IS VIVIDLY PAINTED:
76. O King, remembering this wonderful and holy dialogue
between Keshava and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.
Herein we have a clear statement of Sanjaya's reactions to
his listening to the Lord's Song. He says, "THIS
DISCOURSE BETWEEN KRISHNA AND ARJUNA"1349

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

between God and man, between the Perfect and the
imperfect, between the "higher" and the "lower" --- is at
once "WONDERFUL AND HOLY."
The vision and impression created in his heart by the
philosophy that was heard are so deep and striking, that
Sanjaya admits how irresistibly the memory of those
words rises up again and again in his bosom, giving him
"the thrill of joy" (Harsham).
Indirectly, Vyasa is prescribing the method of study of the
Geeta. It being "a handbook of instruction" on the Art of
Living, it has TO BE READ AGAIN AND AGAIN,
REPEATEDLY
REFLECTED
UPON
AND
CONTINUOUSLY REMEMBERED, until the inner man in
us is completely re-educated in the way-of-life that the
Geeta charts out
for man. The reward for such a painstaking study, and
consistency of application has also been clearly pointed
out.
One rejoices when one comes to recognise a definite
purpose in the otherwise purposeless pilgrimage of man,
from the womb to the tomb, called 'life.' The study of the
Geeta gives not only a purpose to our every-day existence
but also a positive message of hope and cheer to the
world. The Geeta picks us up from the by-lanes of life and
enthrones us as the sovereign power that rules, commands
and orders our own life within.
1350

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Thus the Geeta is an infinite fountain-head of inspiration
and joy. It provides our mind with a systematic scheme of
re-education whereby it can discover a secret power in
itself to tackle intelligently the chaotic happenings around
us which constitute our world of challenges. The Geetaeducated man learns to RECOGNISE A RHYTHM, to SEE
A BEAUTY, and to HEAR A MELODY in the ordinary
day-to-day life --- a life which was till then but a mad
death-dance of appearances and disappearances of things
and beings.
SANJAYA CONFESSES THAT NOT ONLY DOES THE
PHILOSOPHY ENCHANT HIS MIND, BUT EVEN THE
MEMORY OF THE LORD'S WONDROUS FORM AS THE
TOTAL MANIFESTED UNIVERSE HAS A MAGIC OF
ITS OWN WHICH WARMS UP HIS HEART:
77. Remembering and again remembering, that most wonderful
Form of Hari, great is my wonder, O king; and I rejoice again
and again.
AS I OFTEN REMEMBER REPEATEDLY THAT MOST
WONDERFUL FORM OF HARI --- Lord Krishna, the
charioteer, gave the vision of His Cosmic-Form
(Vishwaroopa) in an earlier chapter; it is that Form that is
indicated by Sanjaya here. The Cosmic-Form of the Lord is
an impressive to the man-of-heart, as the philosophy of
the Geeta is unforgettable to the man-of-intelligence. The
concept of the Lord's "Total-Form" is staggering in the
1351

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Vedas, and no doubt, highly impressive in the Geeta. But it
need not necessarily be a mere poetic vision of the great
Vyasa; there are many others whose experiences are
almost parallel.
If the philosophy of the Geeta, as it reveals to us the
glorious purpose in life, inspires and thrills the thinking
aspect in man, the vision of the smiling Lord of
Vrindavana BEHIND EVERY NAME AND FORM,
BENEATH EVERY EXPERIENCE, UNDER EVERY
SITUATION, adds a life-giving joy and a maddening
ecstasy to the drunken heart
of love.
Given the freedom, I suppose, Sanjaya would have written
a full length Sanjaya-song on the Lord's Divine Song!
When the head is thrilled with the silence of understanding, and the heart is intoxicated with the embrace of
love, man gets transported into a sense of inspired
fulfilment.
TO EXPRESS THAT SATISFACTION, LANGUAGE IS A
FRAIL VEHICLE; THEREFORE, WITHOUT DILATING
MUCH UPON WHAT IS UPPERMOST IN HIS MIND,
SANJAYA SUMMARISES THEM ALL INTO A
DECLARATION OF HIS BURNING FAITH, IN THIS
CONCLUDING STANZA OF THE BHAGAWAD GEETA:

1352

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

78. Wherever is Krishna, the Lord of YOGA , wherever is
Paartha, the archer, there are prosperity, victory, happiness and
firm (steady or sound) policy; this is my conviction.
This is the closing stanza of SRIMAD BHAGAWAD
GEETA, which contains altogether seven hundred and
one verses. This concluding verse has not been sufficiently
thought over and commented upon by the majority of
commentators of the Geeta. The superficial word-meaning
of the verse, in fact, can only impress any intelligent
student, at its best, as rather drab and dry. After all
Sanjaya is expressing his private faith in and his personal
opinion about something which the readers of Geeta need
not necessarily accept as final. Sanjaya, in effect, says:
"Where there is Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and Arjuna,
ready with his bow, there prosperity (Sree), success
(Vijaya), expansion (Bhooti), and sound policy (Dhruvaneeti) will be; this is my sure faith."
After all, a student of the Geeta is not interested in
Sanjaya's opinion, and it almost amounts to a foul and
secret indoctrination, if Sanjaya means, diplomatically, to
inject into us his own personal opinion. The Geeta, as a
"Universal Scripture" would have fallen from its own
intrinsic dignity as "the Bible of man" had this stanza no
Eternal Truth to suggest, which readily invokes a
universal appeal.

1353

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

The perfect artist, Vyasa, could never have made such a
mistake; indeed, there is a deeper significance in which an
unquestionable truth has been expounded.
KRISHNA, THE LORD OF YOGA (Yogeshwarah Krishnah) -- All through the Geeta, Krishna represented the Self, the
Atman. This spiritual core is the Ground upon which the
entire play of happenings is staged. He can be invoked
within the bosom of each one of us through any one of the
Yoga-techniques expounded in the Geeta.
ARJUNA, READY WITH HIS BOW (PaarthoDhanurdharah) --- Paartha represents, in this text book, "the
confused, limited, ordinary mortal, with all his
innumerable weaknesses, agitations and fears." When he
has thrown down his "instrument" of effort and
achievement, his bow, and has reclined to impotent
idleness, no doubt, there is no hope for any success or
prosperity. But when he is "READY WITH HIS BOW,"
when he is no more idle but has a willing readiness to use
his faculties to brave the challenges of life, there, in that
man, we recognise a "PAARTHA READY WITH HIS
BOW."
Now putting these two pictures together --- Lord Krishna,
the Yogeshwarah, and Arjuna, the Dhanurdharah --- the
symbolism of a way-of-life gets completed, wherein,
reinforced with spiritual understanding, man gets ready
to exert and pour in his endevours, to tame life and master
prosperity. In such a case, there is no power that can stop
1354

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

him from success. In short, the creed of the Geeta is that
spirituality CAN be lived in life, and true spiritual
understanding is an asset to a man engaged in the battleof-life.
Today's confusions in society and man's helpless
insignificance against the flood of events --- inspite of all
his achievements in science and mastery over matter --are seen, because the Yogeshwarah in him is lying
neglected, uninvoked. A happy blending of the sacred and
the secular is the policy for man as advised in the Geeta.
In the vision of Sri Veda-Vyasa, he sees a world-order in
which man pursues a way-of-life, wherein the spiritual
and the material values are happily wedded to each other.
Mere material production can, no doubt, bring
immediately a spectacular flood of wealth into the pockets
of man, but not peace and joy into his heart. PROSPERITY
WITHOUT PEACE WITHIN IS A CALAMITY,
GRUESOME AND TERRIBLE!
The stanza at the same time refuses to accept the other
extreme; Yogeshwarah Krishna could have achieved
nothing on the battle-field of Kurukshetra without the
Pandava Prince, Arjuna, "ARMED AND READY TO
FIGHT." Mere spirituality without material exertion and
secular achievements will not make life dynamic. I have
been trying my best to bring out, as clearly as I can, this
running vein of thought throughout the Geeta, which
expounds the PHILOSOPHY OF HARMONY and
explains its plan for man's enduring happiness.
1355

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Krishna, in the Geeta, stands for the MARRIAGE
BETWEEN THE SECULAR AND THE SACRED.
Naturally, it is the ardent faith of Sanjaya that when a
community or nation has its masses galvanized to endure,
to act, and to achieve (Paartha, the bow-man) and if that
generation is conscious of and has sufficiently invoked the
spiritual purity of head and heart in themselves (Krishna,
the Lord-of-Yoga), in that generation, prosperity, success,
expansion, and a sound and sane policy become the
natural order.
Even in the arrangement of these terms --- prosperity,
success, expansion and sound policy --- there is an undercurrent of logic which is evident to all students of world
history. In the context of modern times and the political
experiences, we know that without an intelligent and
STEADY POLICY, no government can lead a nation to any
substantial achievement. With a sound policy,
EXPANSION of all the dormant faculties in the
community is brought out, and then only the spirit of coordination and brotherhood in the fields of achievement
comes to play. In this healthy spirit of love and
cooperation, when a disciplined people work hard, and
when their efforts are intelligently channelised by the
sound policies of the government, SUCCESS cannot be far
away. Success thus earned, as a result of national
endeavour, disciplined and channelised by a firm,
intelligent policy, should necessarily yield true
PROSPERITY. A saner philosophy we cannot find even in
modern political thought!!
1356

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

Enduring prosperity must be that which arises from
successful endeavour, that is the result of cooperative and
loving effort and this cannot yield any success unless it is
nurtured and nourished, guarded and protected, by an
intelligent and sound policy.
It now becomes quite clear that it is not only Sanjaya's
faith, but it is the ardent conviction of all men of selfcontrol and disciplined mind (Sanjayas), trained to think
independently.
There are some commentators of the Geeta, who draw our
attention to this concluding word in the Geeta, "my"
(mama), and to the opening word in the Geeta, "Dharma."
Between these two words the seven hundred stanzas are
hung together as a garland of immortal beauty, and so
these commentators summarize the meaning of the Geeta
as "MY Dharma" (Mama Dharma). The Geeta explains the
nature of man, MY Dharma, and the nature of Truth, MY
Dharma and how the true life starts when these two are in
harmony and come to play in one single individual. The
ideal nature of all true students of the Geeta, therefore,
should be a glorious synthesis of both the SPIRITUAL
KNOWLEDGE expressed in their equipoise and character,
and the DYNAMIC LOVE expressed through their service
to mankind and their readiness to sacrifice.
Thus, in the UPANISHADS of the glorious Bhagawad-Geeta,
in the Science of the Eternal, in the scripture of YOGA , in the
1357

Holy Geeta by Swami Chinmayananda

dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, the eighteenth
discourse ends entitled:
THE
YOGA
OF
RENUNCIATION

LIBERATION

THROUGH

The closing chapter is entitled as Liberation through
Renunciation (Moksha-samnyasa-Yoga). This term is very
closely reminiscent of the Asparsa-Yoga of the Upanishads,
and the definition of Yoga as given by Krishna Himself in
an earlier chapter To renounce the false values of life in us
is at once to rediscover the Divine nature in each one of us
which is the essential heritage of man. To discard the beast
in us (Samnyasa), is the Liberation (Moksha) of the Divine
in us.
OM TAT SAT
MAMA SADGURU TAPOVANA CHARANAYOH
"At The Feet Of My Master Tapovanam."
Om Om Om Om Om

1358

