BHAGAVADGITA
HOME STUDY COURSE

With Sanskrit Text, Transliteration,
Word-for-Word Translation,
A Free Translationin English,
An Exhaustive Commentary
in English
Based on Sdkarabhasyam

by

Swami DayanandaSaraswati

ARSHA VIDYA GURUKULAM

INTRODUCTION TO THE BHAGAVADGITA
It is said that a human birth is not easy to achieve. If we look at it from an
evolutionary standpoint, there are millions of years between the ape and the human
being. In other words, the monkey did not become a person overnight. Even from the
standpoint of reincarnation, where human birth is said to be a result of one's own past
actions, karma, it is not easy. And once you have this human body, whether it be due to
karma or to the natural selection inherent in evolution, you are no longer in the hands of
nature. You now have the rare capacity, called free will, to initiate a further process of
evolution. The whole process, then, is in your own hands.
An animal, on the other hand, is fulfilled once it survives a few years and produces
an offspring. The cow, for example, need not do anything more than reach physical
maturity in order to be an adult. It need not do anything to be evolved emotionally. There
is no such thing as an emotionally mature cow. The only goal of a cow's life is to survive
to adulthood and, as an adult, to survive as long as it can. Once it has become an adult,
the cow is mature in every way.
A human being also has to become an adult physically. Otherwise, one's life is
unfulfilled. To become an adult physically, you need only survive by appeasing your
hunger and thirst and avoiding fatal accidents and diseases. You need not do anything
special. The process is a very natural one, made possible by the survival instinct
common to all living beings. Hence, after a few years, you find that you have become an
adult.
Until you are a physical adult, you are in the hands of nature. Nature takes care of
your physical growth until you can no longer say, 'I am a child.' Emotional maturity,
however, does not happen in the same way. Unlike physical maturity, emotional growth
is purely in your own hands. Unlike a cow, one need not be mature just because one
happens to have an adult physical body. Inner maturity is a process that you have to
initiate because you are a human being enjoying a faculty of choice.
THE HUMAN PURSUIT
Whatever is fundamentally sought after by every human being is called
purusdrtha in Sanskrit. Although each individual seeks something peculiar, there are
four ends that everyone seeks, whether he or she is an Eskimo in Alaska or someone
living in a remote village in India. The universal ends most commonly sought after are
security and pleasure - artha and kAma. The remaining two purusarthas - dharma

and moksa, to be explained below - can also be accomplished by a human being.
B.G. Vol. I - I

Bhagavadgita
That which gives you any kind of security - emotional, economical, or social, is
called artha in Sanskrit. Artha may be in the form of cash or liquid assets, stocks, real
estate, relationships, a home, a good name, a title, recognition, influence, or power of
any kind. Such accomplishments boost one's ego and therefore also provide some
security for the ego And although each person seeks various forms of security at a given
time, that he or she is seeking security is common to all.
Seeking pleasure is another purusartha,called kema in Sanskrit. It, too, takes
many forms. For instance, sensory pleasures may be anything from seafood or ice cream
onwards. Examples of intellectual pleasures are those derived from playing certain
games, solving puzzles or riddles, and studying certain bodies of knowledge. Thus, we
have varieties of pleasures.
Anything that satisfies your senses, that pleases your mind, that touches your heart
and evokes in you a certain appreciation, is kama. Any form of pleasure you derive from
your home, for example, or from a relationship is kdma. Music and travel are also
kdma, not artha;because, by pursuing them, you are seeking pleasure, not security. You
do not go to Hawaii or the Bahamas to seek security. In fact, you lose some security, in
the form of money, when you go to these places. Because you happen to have some
money, you travel for pleasure, not for security.
There is another form of pleasure derived from seeing the stars on a beautiful
night, enjoying the sunrise, a flower, a playing child, or a beautiful painting, for
example. Because this pleasure is neither sensory nor intellectual, I will call it aesthetic
pleasure. Even though such pleasures go beyond one's senses and intellect, they are still
kama.

DHARMA AS A HUMAN END
There is a third purusartha,dharma, that is neither artha nor kama. Dharma is
a word with many meanings, as we shall see. Here, it refers to the pleasure born of
harmony, the pleasure derived from friendship, sharing, helping another person, and so
on. For example, when you are able to relieve someone's suffering, you experience a joy
that is not kama. This form of pleasure is different from both artha and kama in that
you do not usually seek out a person in pain in order to pick up some pleasure. It is not
the same as going to Hawaii or to a concert. You happen to come across someone in
pain, you are able to alleviate the person's discomfort, and you feel happy.
A doctor who does not work purely for financial gain enjoys this kind of pleasure.
Charity works in the same way. Those who are able to discover joy in such work do so, I
would say, because there is inner growth and understanding, a certain sensitivity on their
part. This sensitivity is also required to understand love, for to love another person
thoroughly is to understand the other person, for which one should be educated, cultured.
If a person has not learned through experiences, if a person is not cultured, what kind of

Introduction to the Bhagavadgita
joy can he or she get out of life? For such people, there can be only sensory pleasures,
eating, for example. But many simple joys are lacking in their lives. Thus, the gain in
one's life is commensurate with what one knows.
It seems that a certain professor of medicine, in his introductory class, said, 'What
your mind does not know, your eyes do not see.' What he meant was that, without
medical knowledge the cause for a disease would continue to elude a person, even
though the symptoms are everywhere. The eyes may see the symptoms, but the mind
does not know. In life also, the more I know, the brighter life is, because I cannot see
more than what I know. This is not to imply that I should necessarily get more out of
life, only that my life is to be lived properly, fully, which implies a lot of understanding.
Living does not simply mean dragging yourself around from day to day - from
bed to work, back home and to bed again. The whole process repeats itself until the
weekend comes. Then you drag yourself to some recreation in the hope of forgetting
yourself - which is why recreation becomes so important. In fact, your whole life can
be a recreation. Someone once asked a Swami, 'Swamiji, do you not take any holidays?
You seem to be working every day.' In fact, the Swami's life is one long holiday.
If you enjoy what you do, life is very simple. If you do not enjoy what you do,
then you have to do something to enjoy, which can be very costly. On the other hand,
any pleasure that comes out of one's maturing process is a different type of joy. Not
hurting someone, or doing the right thing at the right time, for instance, gives you joy if not immediately, later. Suppose you have postponed doing something, like the
laundry, vacuuming, or letter writing, the day you decide to do it - and do it, you find
that there is a joy in finally having done it - a joy that is neither pleasure nor security. It
is just doing what is to be done; it is dharma, a very big topic that we will discuss later.
For now, it is enough to know that as you grow in your understanding, your dharma
also grows.
These, then, are three of the four purusarthas - artha, kdma and dharma.
Because of the importance we place on dharma, the order can now be reversed -

dharma, artha, and kama. Dharma accounts for your maturity. The more mature you
are, the more dharmika you are. In order to be mature, an understanding of dharma and
conformity to it become of prime importance in one's life. Thus, dharma occupies the
first place among these three human ends. Without violating dharma, doing what is to
be done, you pursue artha and kdma, security and pleasure. This is how these three
universal human pursuits are to be understood.
MOKSA: FREEDOM FROM WHAT?
Even though it comes last, moksa is a very important purusartha,as we shall see.
Moksa is recognised as a pursuit only by a very few people in any given generation.
Because a certain appreciation, a certain maturity or insight, about life and its struggles

Bhagavadgita

is required to understand moksa, people do not discerningly pursue it, although everyone
is in fact, always seeking freedom in one form or other.
Although we think of freedom in a very positive way, the word moksa is actually
defined in a negative sense. There is something binding you, from which you want to
become free and that freedom is moksa. We say, for example, that a man who is not in
jail has freedom, whereas if he is in jail, he does not. Because he cannot choose to come
out, he has lost his freedom of mobility and wants to gain it. He wants freedom from the
shackles of jail.
If you are using crutches because of a leg fracture, you want freedom from the
crutches. Similarly, an infant requiring the help of the wall or mother's hand in order to
stand wants to be free of the wall or the hand and therefore strives to stand on his or her
own. Freedom, then, is always freedom from something.
Moksa means freedom from something I do not want. And because moksa is a
purusartha,a human end common to all, wanting to be free is not peculiar to me alone.
Everyone wants to be free from certain things that are common to all. That I am attached
to particular forms of security, artha, reveals a certain fact about myself - that I am

insecure. That I also seek pleasures, kdma, reveals that I am restless, that I am not
satisfied with myself. I have to do something in order to please myself, which means that
I am displeased with myself.
If you are always seeking security and pleasure, when will you make your life?
When will you really be able to say, 'I have made it! You can say that only when you see
yourself as secure and are pleased with yourself. Then you are free; you have moksa.
Moksa does not mean salvation. In fact, there is no word in Sanskrit for salvation,
which is just as well, since salvation implies a certain condemnation of yourself. It
implies that someone has to salvage you, has to save you, which is not what is meant by
moksa at all. The word moksa refers only to the freeing of myself from certain fetters.
The basic ones are the notions that 'I am insecure' and 'I am displeased with myself.'
I must see myself as secure and be pleased with myself as I am. Only then do I
have moksa. If I am secure and pleased with myself, what situation is going to change
that? I require no security or a situational change whatsoever to be secure and at peace.
This should be understood well. You spend your entire life manipulating the world
to please yourself. In the process, you find that two hands and legs, five senses, and a
mind are not enough to contend with all the factors involved. There are just too many
events and situations, as well as natural forces, over which you seem to have no control.

Introduction to the Bhagavadgita
FREEDOM IS FREEDOM FROM SEEKING
With my limited powers and limited knowledge, I find that I can never measure up
to the demands of gaining the securities and pleasures that I seek. This is why life seems
to be a problem. Only when you reach thirty-nine or forty, when you undergo what is
sometimes referred to as the 'Mid-life crisis,' do you begin to understand this. Even
though you may think your marriage or your job is your crisis, actually you are the crisis.
Your crisis has nothing to do with marriage or any of the other situations in your life.
Your tendency, however, is to find a scapegoat for every problem you have and the
immediate scapegoat available is often your partner in life.
When we look into our various pursuits - artha, kama and dharma, we find

that, what we really seek is none of these. We seek only freedom from being a seeker.
Everyone is a seeker pursuing artha and kama mainly and, to some extent, dharma.
But, ultimately, everyone is seeking only moksa. Therefore, moksa alone is the real end.
In other words, freedom from being insecure is what we seek when we seek security.
When I seek certain securities, I am not really seeking the securities themselves. I am
seeking freedom from being insecure. This distinction should be clearly understood.
The shift in emphasis that this distinction represents is what we call learning.
Seeking security is very natural. For an uninformed person, one who does not think
about or understand his or her own ideas and urges, security is a particular thing and is
always taken to be outside oneself. That - 'I am insecure' - is a totally accepted
conclusion for such a person, a conclusion that is never doubted or questioned.
Various philosophies have arisen from this insecurity. One person says, for
instance, that money will not give you security, while another person says it will - but
only here on earth, not later. Later security, we are told, can only be gained by doing
certain prescribed acts. Thus, we have varieties of religions and philosophies, all of
which have been born out of accepting that, 'I am insecure' and that, security is
something outside of oneself.
Even as a child, one's security depends on the constant availability of protection,
love, and care of one's parents. On the other hand, once the child has grown up, the
situation is reversed. Now the parents' security depends on the attention of the child.
Parents often feel neglected by their grown up children who are now occupied with their
own lives. Once a child has grown up, security is no more in the parents; it lies
elsewhere.
THAT I LACK IS THE PROBLEM
As a child I was insecure and now also I am insecure. There is a constant shift in
what I take to be securities, which is considered to be a normal life for everyone. No one,
however, deserves to have this problem. Security is not the problem. That I lack

Bhagavadgif
something is not the problem. The problem is that 'I' lack. This difference must be seen
clearly.
What I lack is always variable - I lack iced tea; I lack children; I lack a house.
What one lacks is always peculiar to the individual at a given time and place in one's life.
This differs from individual to individual, from culture to culture. However, this 'I lack'
is common to all aiid is entirely different from what I lack. I may lack a healthy body, a
taller body, a thinner body, a turned-up nose, longer eyelashes, or a different skin colour.
And this may only be the beginning of an endless list! But the fact that I conclude that 'I
lack' is universal.
For instance, what can you do if your height is less than you would like it to be?
The most you can do is to wear high-heeled shoes, which does not really make you any
taller. In fact, in the eyes of others you may be shorter. It is only when you are being
recruited for a basketball team that anyone else thinks about your height. Height is your
complex. I do not think about your height until you get into high-heeled shoes and try to
walk. Only then do I see your height because you have drawn my attention to it; and I
immediately cut it down by a few inches. I may actually reduce it more than the actual
height of your heels. You not only fall short of my expectation, but also you become
shorter than what you really are!
Thus, if you have a complex with reference to your height, you are stuck. If you
were a wire or something stretchable, your height could be increased but, here, no
stretching is possible. Similarly, there are a lot of things that you are stuck with because
the things you are not, known and unknown, are countless. And what you lack you can
never totally fulfil. The more you go after what you lack, the more you breed what you
lack because what you lack has a knack of multiplying itself. It is like going to the
supermarket to pick up a few things you lack and coming home with a few more desires
to be fulfilled when you get your following week's paycheque. This is why we say desire
is like fire that leaves a black trail after itself. No matter how much you feed it, fire never
says, 'Enough!' Similarly, human beings can never say 'Enough!' to securities and
pleasures.
INSECURE PLUS INSECURE IS NOT SECURE
When, then, are you going to completely fulfil your arthas and kamas? I am not
saying you should not seek out security; that is not the emphasis here. We are only trying
to understand the very pursuit itself. Money definitely has its value. But, if you think that
there is security in money, or in anything else, the process of seeking becomes endless.
The insecure me, the one who wants to be secure, does not really become secure by the
addition of what I consider to be securities. No one can say, 'I am secure,' even with all
possible securities.

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
As long as I require crutches, the sense of insecurity centred on me will remain
with me. Feeling secure because I have crutches does not mean I am secure. I feel secure
only because of the crutches, whereas the sense of insecurity centred on me remains.
Suppose I am insecure and what I think is secure is as insecure as I am. For
example, if one insecure person marries another insecure person in order to be secure,
the result is not security. All that results is a marriage between two insecure people. Can
there be a greater hell anywhere? When two such people come together, it is a problem
because insecurity plus insecurity do not make security, only double insecurity.
There is a story about a man who, as he was bathing by the side of a river, slipped
and was swept away by the current. Because he could not swim, he prayed, 'Oh! Lord,
please help me!' Just then a log came along and, catching hold of it, the man said, 'My
God! God is great!' Then he realised that the log had fur on it - and hands also. He had
thought he was holding on to a log, but now he realised that the 'log' was holding on to
him. Still he thought that the Lord was saving him. He found, however, that the Lord
was a grizzly bear that, having fallen from a tree, had also been swept up by the current.
Once he realised he was holding on to a bear, he wanted to escape, but the bear already
had too tight a hold on him.
WHO HOLDS ON TO WHAT?
Similarly, you do not know which holds what or who holds whom. You may have
thought you were holding on to something, only to find that you cannot give it up, which
means that it is holding you. This is a problem. Any habit is the same. An alcoholic was
once a free person. When he or she took the first drink, the person poured the alcohol
into the glass and, then, holding on to the glass, drank from it - no problem. However,
after some time the person finds that he or she does not drink at all. As soon as 'Happy
Hour'" arrives, the bottle tells the person, 'Come here,' and he or she goes like a zombie.
Then the bottle says, 'Come on, pick me up!' And the person picks it up. It says, 'Come
on, pour me into the glass! Drink!' And the person drinks. Then, it says 'One more, one
more.' And the person takes more and more alcohol without his volitional control. Who
is this person now, the one who was previously free? Does he or she drink? Or does the
drink, drink the person?
In so many situations, no one knows who holds on to what. I see no difference
between the grabber and the grabbed, the holder and the held. Even inert things like
drinks, cards, or dice, have the capacity to grab me - to say nothing of relationships,
since people are equally insecure. Therefore, an insecure me plus anything in this world
that happens to be within the framework of time is not going to make me secure. This we

SThe time in a bar when drinks are served at reduced prices.

Bhagavadgita
should understand well. We are not trying to develop a particular attitude here, just a
simple appreciation of the facts.
THE FACTS OF INSECURITY
That I am insecure is a fact and that I seek securities is also a fact. That which I
consider secure is not secure because it also is finite. This, too, is a fact.
You may think that, by giving away whatever securities you have, you will
become secure. One man did this. He gave away his house, his business, and his bank
balance, and went to a Swami. But the Swami was also insecure and wanted to have a
following of disciples. Previously, the man was on a husband trip, a father trip, a
business-money trip, and now he is on another trip - a Swanli-dtma-trip minus a house,
wife, children, money and so on. To think that subtraction is going to help, when
addition does not, is nothing but a lack of understanding. And if artha is like this, kIma
is the same.
No pleasure is going to be lasting. Take music, for instance, You buy a recording
of a hit song. Why is this song a hit? Because, like a hit man, it knocks off all the other
songs out of the running. Last month's hit song has been hit and is no longer a hit song. It
only gathers dust on your tape deck. No one bothers about it any more.
Similarly, your attitude is always changing. What made you happy before no
longer provides the same joy. You get tired of everything. Even if God were around you
all the time, you would eventually want some privacy. This constant changing is natural
because you are basically displeased with yourself. Therefore, you are pleased only now
and then. The only silver lining in life is one's hope. This is all that keeps you going.
Perhaps hope is nature's way of enabling you to survive so that you can discover nature
herself.
Suppose those moments of pleasure, which are so few and far between, were
denied to a given person, suppose they were not there at all, do you think a
self-conscious human being, the displeased human being, would want to live? He or she
would surely commit suicide. And, in spite of these moments of pleasure, if a person
thinks there is no possibility of being happy, either because of a loss of some kind or an
apprehension of some great calamity, the person would choose not to live. This is the
thinking behind all suicides.
Therefore, moments of pleasure are worthwhile because they keep you going. The
hope is that you will discover that you do not need a mother-in-law to be displeased; you
need only yourself. If you close the doors, put aside the world and sit in an easy chair
and try to be with yourself, then you will understand whether you are pleased with
yourself or not. You will find that you do not require a world of perception, a world of
books or anything to be displeased. All that you require is yourself. After just a few

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
minutes of sitting with yourself, you want to get up and go out or take a shower anything other than sitting with yourself.
THE WORLD IS NOT THE CAUSE OF YOUR PROBLEMS
To be displeased, then, requires nothing but yourself. It is not the world that
displeases you; you are displeased with yourself. And whatever pleases you is going to
be time-bound, all of which we will see as we study the eighteen chapters of the
Bhagavadgita.
Because any kdma, any pleasure, you pick up is limited by nature - in terms of
time, content, and degree, the one who is displeased remains in spite of occasional
moments of pleasure. Therefore, we have now discerned the problem to be the
conclusion about myself that, 'I am displeased.' This is a fact that is not going to be
altered just because I pick up moments of pleasure. That I am insecure does not change
merely because I acquire or give up certain securities. Thus, the only solution is to see
myself secure and pleased with myself. But how is it possible to do this?
If, with all these securities and pleasures, I am displeased with myself, how am I
going to see myself pleased without them? This is where the teaching called Vedanta
comes in and tells you that your problem is not one of lacking something, but of not
knowing that you do not lack anything. It converts all one's pursuits into a pursuit of
knowledge.
In the vision of Vedanta, there is no reason for you to be displeased with yourself
because you are totally acceptable to yourself - not in terms of attitude, but in reality. It
is not a belief; it is a fact, a discoverable fact. Only something that can be discovered is a
fact; and the discoverable fact here is that you lack nothing. You are totally free. This is
a vision of you and this is the heart of Vedanta, the heart of this teaching. The problem
that 'I lack' is thereby converted into ignorance, the cause of which I do not know for the
time being. Until I come to know, the vision assumes the status of a promise.
YOU ARE THE PROBLEM; YOU ARE THE SOLUTION
Vedanta defines the problem as not what you lack, but that you lack, and says that
you are the solution because you are the problem.
There are two types of problems. One has its solution outside the problem and the
other has its solution within the very problem itself. The solution to the problem of
feeling cold, for example, is outside the problem in the sense that you have to cover
yourself, go to the fireside, or go out into the sun. You may even decide to go to the
Bahamas. When the solution to a problem is outside, it means that you have to do
something to solve the problem. If hunger is your problem, you, have to feed the hunger
by eating food, which is also outside. The solution to a jigsaw puzzle, however, is within

Bhagavadgita
There is
the problem, within the puzzle itself. Because the solution is within the problem.
you do
no problem, in fact. The only problem is you and the solution is also you. When
understand,
do
you
not understand something, it is a problem for you, whereas when
there is no problem. The understanding is the solution. In the vision of Vedanta, you
have no problem, in fact.
Then, you may ask, how can I recognise that I do not have a problem? This seems
not
to be one more problem to add to the ones I already have. But is it? One problem is
self
the
Vedanta,
of
vision
there - the problem of self-non-acceptance. Because, in the
is acceptable. What else do you want really? The only problem any human being has is
self-non-acceptance. Therefore, you are the problem and you are the solution. Now your
pursuit becomes one of knowing yourself and it can be a game - fun, all the way. This,
then, is the teaching.
A discriminative analysis of dharma, artha, and kama leads one to a certain
fundamental human problem. Once this human problem has been discerned, you will
take special steps to resolve it, even though you may continue to pursue artha, kama,
and dharma. The solution to this original fundamental problem is called moksa.
MOKSA IS NOT SALVATION
Moksa, as we have said, is not an equivalent to salvation, as is commonly thought.
Nor is it some kind of accomplishment other than yourself. As freedom from something,
however, moksa could be considered a negative accomplishment of sorts. Nevertheless,
there is nothing more positive than moksa.
SOnce we say 'freedom,' the question is, 'Freedom from what?' and the answer is
he
simply, 'Freedom from something I do not want.' No one wants freedom from what
and
or she wants. Therefore, no one wants freedom from artha or kama, securities
pleasures. We want artha,,ama, a little bit of dharma plus moksa.
Moksa is not freedom from artha or kama. That, which artha provides, moksa
cannot provide. But that which moksa provides cannot be provided by artha,kama, and
dharma combined. A person who has moksa also has the freedom to pursue the other
three human ends, artha, kdma, and dharma, if he or she so chooses. This, then, is real
freedom and not freedom from these pursuits.
And who is it that undertakes these pursuits? The person, called purusa in
Sanskrit, meaning any person young or old, man or woman, Indian or American. This
purusa, the person, is the one who is after artha and kama.
ALL ACTIONS HAVE A PURPOSE
A human being never undertakes a deliberate activity without it having a purpose.
Even involuntary actions have a purpose, but here, we are talking only about those

Introduction to the BhagavadgitS
actions that are voluntary. Voluntary, deliberate actions always presuppose a desirer,
whose desire is never for the action as such, but for the result, the object of desire. There
is always some end in view.
An object that you have cannot become an object of desire if you know you have
it. However, you may have something and not recognise that you have it and, therefore,
it may become the object of your desire. Thus, the clause 'if you know you have it,' is
important here. For instance, you cannot desire a head over you shoulders, since you
already have one. Even if you have such a desire, no one can fulfil it; not even the Lord.
If you were to ask him why, in spite of all of your devotion and prayers, he has not
fulfilled your desire, he could only say, 'I cannot give you what you already have.'
When I tell you that I cannot give you something, there are only two possible reasons for
my response. One is that I am incapable of giving it to you, due to my lack of
knowledge, power, or resources. The other possibility is that I can give it to you, but you
do not deserve it, you are not qualified to receive it. Therefore, either you are not
qualified to receive it or I am not qualified to give it to you.
Here, however, the incapacity to give you a head over your shoulders is because
you are asking for something you already have. How, then, can even God give you one?
If you want one more head, being God, he can give you a second head, although I do not
know how a second head is going to help you, if the one you already have has not helped
you. But he can give it to you. You will have to tell him, of course, where you would like
it put. But do not ask him to give you a head over your shoulders. What you have, he
cannot give you.
Although you cannot desire an object that you know you have, you can always
desire an object that you do not have. There are many things that you do not have, like a
green card, a new house, another job, a promotion, a wife, a husband, or children, a trip
to a particular place - anything you do not have, you can desire. Thus, what you do not
have can become an object of your desire.
Without a purpose, there is no effort, no deliberate activity. Therefore, the purusa,
the person undertakes activities for accomplishing different ends - mainly artha and
kama, but also dharma. If this is so, there is a very important question to be asked, 'Do
I want artha and kama for the sake of artha and kdma themselves?' The answer to this
question is what distinguishes the entire Vedic vision of human life from one's usual way
of looking at it.
WHY DO I SEEK OUT SECURITIES AND PLEASURES?
Is kdma for its own sake? Is it for the sake of pleasure? Is it just for fun? If so,
then with it or without it, you are the same. You go for it just because you go for it. In
other words, it is nothing more than a fancy. But is this really the case? Are artha and
kama, which we are seeking in life, for their own sake or are they for myself? The Veda

Bhagavadgita
says that every object of my desire is for my sake alone - atmanastu kamaya sarvam
priyam bhavati.'

We only desire that which we know. No one can desire an object that is unknown
to him or her. None of you has a desire for 'Gagabugan,' for instance. An unknown
Gagabugan cannot be an object of desire. In fact, there is no such thing as Gagabugan.
No amount of coaxing will cause you to get into your car and go to buy Gagabugan. But,
you always have a reason for getting into your car. Some desire is always being fulfilled.
Thus, an unknown object does not become an object of desire.
Only known objects become objects of desires. There are of course, some known
objects for which I do not have a desire - scorpions, cancer, etc., for example. In fact,
the more I know of such objects, the more I want to be rid of them. Also, an object that
has been known and loved by me need not always be desirable to me. I may have no
desire for it whatsoever a few years down the road. No one performs an action or
undertakes a course of action without an end in view. Whether the end is right or not can
only be discovered later. One may change one's view, or give it up altogether, for a
variety of reasons. We have all done this. But what is desirable now, I will definitely
seek out. Therefore, one who desires a particular end, any artha or kama, does so for his
or her own sake.
Suppose you say, 'No, Swamiji, it is not for my sake; it is for the sake of my son.'
This only means that your 'me' has become a little extended, but it always reduces to
'me.' Your 'me' can extend to the community in which you live, to your religion and to
your nation also. It is your ego - an extended ego - and the more extensions, the
healthier the ego. Still, the end is always for your sake alone.
PRAYER IS ALWAYS FOR ONE'S OWN SAKE
Even if you offer a prayer, for whose sake is the prayer? For God's sake? Is God in
such difficulty that you have to pray for him also? If God requires our prayers in order to
survive, then to whom should I pray? If you are praying to God for God's sake, then for
God's sake, please give it up! When one says, 'For God's sake,' it is only an expression.
You do not do anything for God's sake.
It is also often said that one should 'Serve God.' Is it that, God has too much work
to do and therefore needs our help? Of course not. Your service and your prayer is for
your sake alone. There is nothing wrong with that. If you pray for your mother, father,
children, humanity and all living beings, you do so because you can only be happy if
others are happy. How can you be happy if everyone else is unhappy?
We see this in games, for instance. In tennis, you always start with love - like
marriage! - and then fight to the bitter end. One person wins and the other loses. The
1 Brhadaranyakopanisad2.4.5

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
one who wins, throws his or her racket into the air and says, 'Wonderful! I won!'
Whereas, the one who loses, never throws his or her racket into the air, although it may
be thrown to the ground in a gesture of defeat! And when the winner approaches the net,
still ecstatic and gasping for breath, to shake hands with the loser, the elation subsides a
little, because every human heart knows what it is to be on the other side. Thus, when
others are unhappy, you cannot be happy.
Desiring arthas and kamas, then, I make certain efforts; and if these efforts do not
seem to be enough, I make another effort called prayer. Prayer is neither an artha nor a
kdma; it is dharma. Through prayer, you want to gain some invisible result which will
give you artha and kdma. Although spiritual seekers do not pray for artha and kdma,
they do pray for knowledge and maturity, which again is for one's own sake alone. This
aspect of the human personality is very important and is basic to the vision of Veddnta.
When you know that, whatever you do, is for your own sake, everything becomes
meaningful. You find that what you do has its place and everything falls into place.
Nothing is more efficacious than anything else; no one action is more important than
another. Each action becomes important in its own sphere and is meant for producing its
own result. Can we say that the ears are better than the eyes or that the eyes are better
than the ears? No, we require both. If I see you shouting at me but cannot hear what you
are shouting, I cannot respond to you properly. Eyes have their own sphere, as do the
ears. Similarly, each organ - the kidney, liver, heart, lung, and so on - has its own
sphere, each one as important as any of the others.
But in order for everything to fall into its place, the starting point must be proper.
Here, the proper starting point is knowing that any action I perform is always for a given
end and that end is for my sake alone. Vedanta takes this statement one step further to
cover certain important relationships. A wife is dear to her husband not for her sake, but
for his sake. Similarly, the husband becomes dear to his wife for her sake, not for his
sake. If I understand that everything I do is for my own sake alone, then even my
relationships would be very objective. I will not go about saying, 'I did so much for you'
- the starting point for all kinds of trouble.
FREEDOM FROM BEING A WANTING PERSON
That I want artha and kdma reveals that, I am an insecure and unhappy person
from two different standpoints. What do I really want? Do I want the actual artha and
kdma, the objects themselves or do I want security and happiness? Because I want
security and happiness, all arthas and kdmas are reduced to security and happiness
alone.
If I am insecure, I naturally seek security and if I am unhappy, I seek happiness.
However, it is not the security itself that I want. What I really want is freedom from
insecurity. In terms of security, I am wanting. In terms of fullness and happiness also, I

Bhagavadgitd
am wanting. Therefore, I want freedom from being a wanting person and, in order to be
free from being a wanting person, I have to see myself as secure. I have to see myself as
one who does not lack anything and I can see myself in this way alone when I have no
sense of lack.
If I am insecure and unhappy, and I see myself as secure and happy because of
some kind of self-hypnotism, for instance, then I am under yet another delusion. It is
better to be insecure than to be deluded into thinking that I am secure. If I know I am
insecure, then at least I can be objective and thereby understand my problems.
Thus, one has to be secure in order to see oneself as secure. To be able to say, 'I
am happy,' one has to be happy to understand the happiness we talk about. I can
therefore see myself as secure and happy either by becoming so or by already being so. I
am using two different words here, 'becoming' and 'being' for a reason. We generally
see ourselves as insecure and unhappy and then try to become secure and happy. The
whole process of living, the struggles in our lives, are all a process of becoming - being
insecure, we seek to become secure.
In the final analysis, people are all after the same thing. One may seek this and
that, but over the shoulders of seemingly different ends, we see two common ends being secure and being happy. My hope is that one day I will become secure, that one
day I will become happy. Therefore, even when we are seeking artha and kama, we are
all seeking freedom from being insecure and unhappy. This must be clearly understood.
MOKSA AS THE END IN LIFE

Given that everyone wants freedom from being a wanting person, everyone wants
moksa. When it is put in this way, it looks as though moksa is just another end. In fact, it
is not another end; it is the end, the end behind all ends. We refer to moksa as another
end, another purusartha,only because people do not recognise it as the only end, even
though they seek freedom from insecurity. Recognising this end is the culmination of

one's life; the end of sarmsra - insecurities and unhappiness.
The culmination of one's life is not ageing; it is the ability to discern yourself as
one who is secure and happy. This discerning is part of growing up. Once the fact that
you are secure and happy has been discerned, even though you may continue in your
various artha and kama pursuits, you have taken the necessary step for moksa.
However small the step, the step has been made. Having 'stepped into' this teaching, the
necessary step has been taken.
You should not be alarmed by the word moksa. You need not worry about what
will happen to your family if you study and become enlightened. Believe me, your
family will be happy because they will no longer have to deal with your insecurities and
unhappiness. Also, by trying to gain enlightenment, the pressure you were feeling will

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
definitely be less because you now have something better to accomplish in life.
Otherwise, life is a problem.
Marriage, for example, cannot be an end in itself. If it is, there will be problems,
and the marriage will end. Marriage is a means, not an end, whereby husband and wife
each seek freedom from insecurity. Freedom from insecurity is their common end and
they help each other. Together, as companions, they make the journey. This most
significant aspect of marriage is acknowledged in the seven steps of a Hindu marriage
ceremony. Only when these seven steps have been taken has the marriage taken place.
Each of the seven steps represents one aspect of the couple ' journey, for which there is a
destination, moksa.
Discerning moksa as the end in life and seeking it make one's life meaningful.
They do not prevent a person from seeking artha and kima. In fact, without them, life
is just a rat race. One should always remember that the truth of the rat race is that, even
after the race, the winning rat continues to be a rat. The vision is now clear; freedom is
seeing myself as a secure and happy person, free from being insecure and unhappy.
The whole struggle in life stems only from insecurity and unhappiness. One thinks
that by adding some security, one will become secure. In this way, life is one of
becoming; and, in the process, one becomes hurt, aged, and has all kinds of things
happen to him or her. If the fundamental problem is not discerned, one's life is wasted.
All that is achieved is that one human life has been spent. The good thing about all of
this is that, the Veda says you always have another chance - and another and another!
While this may provide some satisfaction, it is not a solution to the fundamental
problem.
Now, if there is no 'becoming free,' and I have to be free, then I must already be
free. Moreover, if I am already free and I seek freedom, then I am seeking something
that I already am. I know that I want freedom, but I do not know that I am free.
Therefore, not knowing I am already free is the problem.
If there is ignorance of oneself, in order to know oneself, there should be a means
of knowledge. And it is a fact that what can be known by one means of knowledge
cannot be known by another means of knowledge. For example, what can be known by
the eyes, in terms of colour and form cannot be known by the ears, in terms of sound.
Similarly, what can be inferred can only be inferred at a given time and place.
The basic means of knowledge available to me for knowing things other than
myself is perception. But the self, myself, cannot be an object of perception like sound
(0abda),touch (sparga), a form or colour (ripa),a taste (rasa), or a smell (gandha).
Only those objects which have the attributes of sound, form or colour, smell, taste, and
touch can be known as objects of my senses; whereas the self is the one who uses this

Bhagavadgitd
means of knowledge, perception. Therefore, I cannot employ perception as a means of
knowledge to know myself.
One's perception can be enhanced by microscopes, telescopes, and various other
instruments, thereby gathering better data and increasing one's capacity to make more
accurate inferences based on perception. These better data definitely question one's
previous understanding. For instance, because you see the sun rising in the eastern sky
and setting in the west, you conclude from your perceptual data that the sun rises and
sets. And the earth is stationary. However, seeing the sun move does not mean that it
moves. The sun can appear to be moving but, if you go to the North Pole, you will see
that the sun does not move from east to west. You now have better data because of
which you revise your earlier conclusion. This new conclusion then becomes the basis
for additional data and inferences.
Similarly, if we put a stick in a glass of water, the stick looks bent. You may think
that the water has the capacity to bend the stick, but when you pull it out, you see that it
is not bent. Your conclusion or knowledge now is that it does not bend, that it only
appears to be bent while in the glass of water. Perception is negated by conclusive
knowledge. That the stick appears to be bent when it is not is now understood as an
are
optical illusion. Conclusions based on better data are all valid and all conclusions
case.
arrived at through a means of knowledge, pramana - inference in this
The question now becomes, can the self, myself, who uses inference and
And
perception, become an object for either of these means of knowledge? It cannot.
yet, at the same time, I must know myself.
WHAT MEANS OF KNOWLEDGE IS THERE FOR KNOWING MYSELF?
I do know that I exist and, to know this, I do not require a means of knowledge, as
we shall see more clearly later. All I need to know is what I am. Am I as I conclude? Am
I insecure? What are the reasons for concluding that I am insecure? We will also see all
of this more in detail, later. But, for now, it is enough to know that ignorance is the main
reason that I see myself as insecure.
and
Ignorance is the main reason for any error. But, here, the error is typical
wherever an error is typical, there are other incidental reasons that make it so. Suppose
You do
you mistake a rope for some other object. What kind of a mistake do you make?
take
could
you
not take the rope to be an elephant. Such a mistake is not possible. But
the rope to be a snake or any number of other similar-looking objects. You cannot,
however, mistake it for something totally dissimilar.
Similarly, there is self-ignorance leading to certain typical conclusions on the part
of every being - that I am insecure, unhappy, and so on. There are, thus, incidental
causes for such conclusions as well as the prime cause, ignorance, which we are dealing

Introduction to the Bhagavadgita
with here. Knowledge alone can dispel ignorance and knowledge cannot take place
without a means of knowledge - even knowledge that is picked up accidentally, like the
knowledge of Penicillin, for example.
Knowledge picked up accidentally does not preclude a means of knowledge. In
fact, there was a great deal of knowledge leading to the accidental discovery of Penicillin
- the greatest discovery of the century, I would say, since it has revolutionised the
quality of human life. Infections that were once fatal succumb to this wonder drug and
certain innovative surgeries, such as heart transplants, can now be performed, thanks to
Alexander Fleming, who stumbled upon this particular knowledge.
'Stumbling upon,' serendipity, is also a means of knowledge. If the scientist who
discovered Penicillin had not been qualified, he would not have had the knowledge to
question why the strain of bacterium he was culturing had been destroyed by a particular
fungus. When he found the bacteria dead, he would have just said, 'They died. Better
luck next time.' Instead, he had the capacity to look into the whole situation and, using
the proper means of knowledge, experiments, and so on, he concluded that, this
particular fungus destroys bacteria.
Knowledge itself is never stumbled upon. All that is stumbled upon is a particular
situation leading to the knowledge. For knowledge to take place, you have to recognise
the situation and this recognition is what is meant by knowledge. But, the self can never
be stumbled upon, even if you remove all your thoughts, as some people maintain.
Which self will you stumble upon? Who is it that is stumbling and what is it that is being
stumbled upon? If you are ignorant of your self and remove all the thoughts you
previously had, what will you be? You will still be ignorant - without thoughts. Then,
if you conclude that you are enlightened because you have removed all thoughts, the
conclusion will be a thoughtless conclusion.
THOUGHTS NEED NOT BE ELIMINATED
This you must know. The enlightened mind is not brought about by the elimination
of thoughts. Knowledge always comes because of an appropriate means of knowledge.
There is no way of altering knowledge and there is no replacement for a means of
knowledge. Therefore, what can be known by a given means of knowledge can be
known only by that means of knowledge. There is no accommodation here. If you have
to see a colour, what accommodation can there be? Only the eyes will see colour; your
nose certainly will not. There is no other means for knowing colour except the eyes.
Because I cannot stumble upon my self, will I not remain ignorant in spite of
anything I might do? And if so, might one not also ask, 'is it not enough just to be a
devotee? Why should I study all these books? Why should I have this knowledge? As a
devotee, will I not gain moksa when I die?'
B..

Vol. I- 2

Bhagavadgta
You may think that, because of your devotion, you will go to heaven and sit with
God. However, you will still be ignorant. In addition, how long will it be before you
become bored there and want to come back? On the other hand, the reward for all your
prayers, offered either in this life or in previous lives, is stumbling upon the means of
knowledge for knowing the atma or even understanding what a means of knowledge is.
This is all stated in the Vedas. What is the means of knowledge to know the self then?
We have seen that it has to be other than perception and inference and, therefore, can
only be external means - words. For facts that I cannot know by perception and
inference, words, gabda, can be a means of knowledge. And those words are called
Veda. They are with us, meaning that they are with humanity. We refer to them as
'revealed' and look upon them as a means of knowledge for truths that can be neither
inferred nor perceived.' This acceptance of the Veda as a pramina is what is meant by
Sraddhd.

THE VEDA AS A MEANS OF KNOWLEDGE
Suppose I were to say, 'The Veda says that there is such a thing as heaven,' can
you prove it? Can you disprove it? If it can be proven, it is not knowledge exclusive to
the Veda. Since we cannot prove or disprove it, the Veda is the pramana for knowing
about heaven.
Anything that cannot be proved or disproved is the sphere of the Veda and is its
definition as well. That there is a heaven, that there is an afterlife, that there is not an end
of everything and everyone, cannot be proved. Nor can you prove that, for all your
actions, right and wrong, there are invisible results, accrued to your account, called
punya and papa.

The Veda says that putnya is the result of good action and papa is the result of
wrong action. The Veda also says, along with some supporting logic, that papa accrued
to our account has to be paid for with pain. This is called the law of karma. Can you
disprove such statements? Can you prove them? You can neither prove them nor can you
disprove them.
There are a number of other things mentioned in the Veda. For instance, we are
told that by performing a certain ritual, we will receive a specific result, either
immediately or later. Suppose you perform a ritual for the sake of having a child, called
1 y~un~r
0

;\ jtq

rr
'Mqq41
wpu
( T

*T
T

I
II

pratyaksenanumitydvu yastUpayo na budhyate
etam vidanti vedena tasmid vedasya vedata - Rgveda-bhdsya
People know through the Vedas that which cannot be known through perception or
inference. Therefore the Vedas area means ofknowledge.

Introductionto the Bhagavadgits
Putrakamesti. You have made every effort possible and the best medical advice
available has assured you that there is no reason for you not to have a child. But, then,
something is denying you this particular gift. Since you are dealing with an unknown
factor, and you want a specific result, you perform a specific prayer, not a
broad-spectrum prayer. This specific prayer takes care of the unknown factor that is
denying you the gift of a child - and a child comes to you. All of this is stated in the
Veda. Because this ritual and its result is given by the Veda, you accept it - along with
all the other statements made therein. The spheres covered in the Veda are only those
that are not available for perception and inference.
The first portion of the Veda deals with various rituals, prayers, karma, punya,
papa, and so on, and is called the parvabhagaor the karmakanda.The end portion of
the Veda deals with certain facts about the nature of the self that cannot be stumbled
upon by any other means of knowledge at our disposal. This is called thejfienakandaor
the Vedanta or the uttarabhaga.
When we say that something is beyond one's inference or perception, we do not
mean that it is beyond the mind. We mean that, it is not available for one's inference or
perception. Still, it has to be known and any knowledge takes place only in the mind.
Therefore, where does self-knowledge take place? Only in the mind - manasd eva
anudrastavyam.Because all knowledge has to take place in the mind, you cannot go
'beyond the mind' to gain self-knowledge.
Self-knowledge is a peculiar knowledge in that, it is not knowledge of an object. It
is knowledge of myself, for which the means of knowledge is the last portion of the
Veda, in the Upanisads, collectively called Vedanta. Any statement that reveals the
truth of oneself, the nature of oneself, with all fallacies removed, is Vedanta, whether it
is in Sanskrit, some tribal dialect, orany other language. Although the literal meaning of
the word 'Veddnta' is 'the end of the Veda,' the word 'Veda' itself means 'a body of
knowledge.' This body of knowledge is available for the humanity. All that one has to do
is make use of it.
REVEALED KNOWLEDGE -

APAURUSEYA-PRAMANA

How has this knowledge come about? We can say, that it has come about by
revelation. But, to do so, requires a certain understanding of the word 'revelation.'
Anyone can say, 'I had a revelation yesterday.' God always comes in dreams, it seems,
and tells certain people all sorts of things. I can also say I had a dream in which God
came; but, in my dream, God said, 'I never come in dreams!'
The statement that 'The entire Veda and hence Vedanta is a revealed knowledge'
is not an immature statement, as we will come to understand. The entire Veda is a body
of knowledge that was not authored by any person. It was revealed to the rsis directly.
That is why the rsis are not the authors of the Veda. They are the seers of the mantras

Bhagavadgita
- mantra-drastarahand not mantra-kartarah.Therefore the Vedas are considered to
be apauruseya, not born of human intellect. They are considered to be a pramana
because, they reveal some thing that is not available to us through perception or
inference be it the knowledge of various ends and means in the karma-kanda or the
knowledge of the self in the end portion of the Vedas. Thus my definition of Vedanta is
that, it is a means of knowledge, a pramana in the form of words. The sphere of this
means of knowledge is 'you.' It talks about 'you.'
You now have a means of knowledge, which you did not have before. Originally,
you had only inference and perception, which you cannot press into service to know
yourself. Naturally, then, you look for an appropriate means of knowledge and find that
there is none available to you other than the one that is outside of you.
An appropriate means of knowledge must tell you something valid about yourself.
In other words, it cannot be fallacious. When something is said about you, it can either
be true or untrue, something that is subject to personal validation. The word 'revelation'
here is to be understood in terms of an appropriate means of knowledge. The first step
towards self-knowledge, then, is accepting Vedanta as a revealed means of knowledge.
How do we know that, Vedanta is a means of knowledge? What is the proof? Is
there a proof for a means of knowledge? If Vedanta is a means of knowledge for the
self, it requires neither inferential nor perceptual proof. All that is required is that it
should not contradict what you know inferentially or perceptually.
HOW DO YOU PROVE THAT VEDANTA IS A PRAMANA
Vedanta cannot be disproved as a means of knowledge and it requires no proof
other than self-validation. Let us suppose that a man who was born blind undergoes a
new surgical procedure, at the age of thirty-five, that will enable him to see. The surgery
is considered to be a success, there are no complications, and the doctors are convinced
that the man will see. After removing the bandages, the doctor says, 'Please open your
eyes.' But, keeping his eyes closed tightly, the man says, 'Doctor, I will only open my
eyes when you prove that I can see.' What can the doctor do now? He is being asked to
prove that the man's eyes are a means of knowledge, that they are capable of sight. But
how can he do that? He can only say, 'I think you will be able to see. The surgery went
very well and there is no reason why your eyes should not see.' Even if the doctor forces
the man's eyes open, the only proof that he will be able to see is the sight registered by
the eyes themselves.
Vedanta says that you are the solution to your problem and that there is no other
solution. You have already tried to resolve the problem in a number of different ways.
Vedanta does not promise anything. It does not say you will become the solution; it says
you are the solution. To become the solution, implies a certain commitment and

Introduction to the Bhagavadgita
investment, meaning that you may find it or you may not, since every 'becoming' is
fraught with uncertainty.
In the Vedic vision of the reality, everything that is known and unknown is
Brahman, and that Brahman you are - tat tvam asi. Gaining this vision, one finds
oneself free from all the limitations imposed upon oneself due to ignorance and error.
TWO COMMITTED LIFE-STYLES
To gain this vision, the Veda prescribes two committed life-styles. One is a life of
activity - pravrttimdrga and the other a life of renunciation of activity nivrttimdrga. Sahkara introduces his bhdsya to the Bhagavadgita with the exposition
of this two-fold dharma as it is revealed by the Veda. Here, dharma can be understood
as a religious or as a spiritual pursuit.
The Veda talks about action or activity - karma, meaning not only religious
activities, but also those that we consider as secular. All activities, whether religious or
secular, are considered to be dharma; and thereby become duties. This is what is meant
by the life-style of pravrtti, whereas the life-style of nivrtti is called renunciation sannydsa.
The life-style of pravrtti is two-fold; a pravrtti for achieving security and
pleasures, here and in the hereafter, and a pravrtti for the purpose of one's own maturity,
for the purification of oneself - antahkarana-9uddhi,as we shall see later. The same
acts of prayers and other religious activities are done for both purposes.
There are, therefore, two types of people who follow the pravrttimarga.Both the
types follow the Veda, but one group does so for the purpose of gaining immediate
pleasures and securities. This group also follows the Veda for the unseen results of good
deeds to be converted into better forms of security or pleasure later, either here or in the
hereafter. The second group of people follow the Veda and engage in various actions for
the sake of antahkarana-guddhiwith moksa as their end in view. People belonging to
both these groups accept the Veda as a means of knowledge - pramana,and are called
vaidikas. And because they are vaidikas, they are referred to as believers - dstikas.
BELIEVER AND NON-BELIEVER
In English, we use the words 'atheist' and 'theist' purely with reference to whether
or not a person believes in God. It is not so in vaidika-dharma. Here, one may believe
in the Veda and not believe in a personal God at all. Such a person interprets the Veda in
such a way that there is no such I9vara, no creator at all. Thus, there can be a vaidika,
one who accepts the Veda as a pramdna, who is an dstika, a believer, who believes in
the Veda, but does not believe in God as a person.

Bhagavadgita
For us, then, astika means someone who believes in the Veda as a pramana and
ndstika is one who does not. Given this definition, there are many nastikas, people who
do not accept the Veda as a pramana and who are religious. For instance, a follower of
Buddha, although a ndstika, should not be dismissed as irreligious. Such people are
religious in their own way. However, in our view, a Buddhist is a nastika based on our
definition of astika and nastika. Similarly, a person who follows Mahavira, a Jain, is
also a nastika. The Sankhya philosopher, Kapila, and his followers, on the other hand,
are astikas, vaidikas. They accept the Veda as a pramana, but they do not accept
Isvara. One who follows the Vedic rituals, but who does not accept an Isvara, is also an
dstika.
Although Buddhists and Jains are ndstikas, they both believe in karma. They
believe there is an afterlife and that there is such a thing as nirvana,liberation or moksa,
which is gained after a number of births. That is their belief and they have their own
arguments to support it.
When moksa is the end in view, the two committed life-styles - pravrttimarga
and nivrttimnrga must be properly understood. They are stated very clearly in the
Vedas and are again presented in the Gitd as well as by Sankara in his opening
commentary.
ALLOWING THE MEANS OF KNOWLEDGE TO WORK
If I am the solution, I have no reason either to deny what Vedanta says or to prove
that it is correct. Just as, in our earlier example, the man had to open his eyes to prove
that he could see, so too, the only proof that Vedanta is a means of knowledge is in
allowing it to work. I should let the words do their magic on me. 'Words' refers to a
certain knowledge born of the words. Words are not just words. They can reveal and
thereby remove my ignorance.
The words need not always give rise to indirect knowledge; they can also give
direct knowledge. When the Veda talks about heaven, the knowledge is definitely
indirect. In fact, it is a belief. There is a description giving you some indirect knowledge
about heaven, if indeed there is one. Every tradition has its own description of heaven
and we understand it from that description.
The Veda, then, reveals the self by saying that it is beyond words and, at the same
time, uses words to make you see the truth of yourself. Therefore, the self is not 'beyond
words' in the usual sense of the term. It is something entirely different, highly technical,
as we will see, and may take some time to understand.
When words are about an object away from myself, the knowledge is indirect and
when they are about an object around myself, the knowledge is direct. Suppose I hold up
an orange. You know it is a fruit, but suppose you do not know what kind of fruit it is.

Introduction to the Bhagavadglta
Then I tell you it is an orange. You now know that it is an. orange. Then you want to
know how it tastes and I tell you how it tastes. That is not enough. You have to taste it
actually. You also have to taste some other oranges as well. Only then you come to know
more or less, all about an orange. When you smell an orange, peel it, and eat it, not
knowing that it is an orange, and I say, 'This is an orange,' the knowledge is direct
knowledge, immediate knowledge.
Now, I ask, 'Do you exist or not?' 'I exist. I am,' you say. Then I ask, 'Who are
you?' To this question, there are many answers - all of which reveal, 'I am insecure.'
However, I say, 'you are secure.' This is not just a statement. I have a whole
methodology of teaching. I take you through all the steps logically and then I say,
'Therefore, you are secure.' Is this knowledge immediate, direct, or mediate, indirect? It
is immediate, direct knowledge. Vedanta is therefore a pramana, a means of
knowledge, and you have no other way to proceed except to expose yourself to it, taking
it as a means of knowledge. You need to understand exactly what Vedanta is saying.
And if you do not understand, if you have questions, then you should make an effort to
understand.
If what Vedanta says is untenable, I should see how untenable it is and examine
the untenability. Perhaps it is my understanding that is untenable and what is said is
tenable. If that is the case, then, I correct my understanding and keep on correcting it,
thereby seeing what Vedanta has to say.
THE GITA AS A MEANS OF KNOWLEDGE
The Gitt, of course, is not as voluminous as the Vedas, which contain all the
Upanisads. The Upanisads are the original source book which is understood with the
help of books like the Gita, since these books present the same material very cogently in
an easily understood form. This is why the Giti is referred to as the gitaiastra.
There are seven hundred verses in the GltZ, contained in eighteen chapters, the
first chapter and the initial few verses of the second chapter providing the context. We
have, then, the entire gitasastrain seventeen chapters wherein the two-fold dharma of a
committed life-style for moksa is unfolded.
Because the Gita is a book (grantha)that unfolds this dharma, it is looked upon
as a pramana-grantha,even though the Upanisadsare the pramana, not being born of
a given intellect. The Upanisads, meaning the Vedas, form the means of knowledge.
But the Gita is also looked upon as a pramanabecause it upholds and unfolds what the
Veda (sruti) says. If the Gitd said anything not in keeping with the sruti, it would
definitely not be considered a pramana-grantha.The Gita would not be studied, nor
would Saikara have written a commentary on it.

Bhagavadgita
The Gitd is accepted as pramana-granthabecause of its affinity and fidelity to
the Veda. Lord Krsna himself confirms in the Gitd that, what he is saying has already
been said in the Veda. Further more, the Gitd is presented by Vydsa who is considered
to be the editor of the Vedas.
The four Vedas, collectively referred to as the Veda, existed even before Vydsa.
He was the one who grouped them properly so that a designated person in a given family
could study one particular Veda and then hand it over to each succeeding generation.
Because Vydsa knew the Vedas so well, he was considered to be all-knowing
(sarvajha).In the middle of the vast, beautiful word tapestry of his epic, Mahtlbhdrata,
Vydsa presented the wisdom of the Vedas, in the form of the Gith. It shines in the midst
of the much larger work like a pendant jewel. These eighteen chapters are therefore
considered to be an authentic pramdna.
The first argument for the Gitd being a pramdna, then, is that it does not
contradict what the Veda says. It expounds and illustrates what the source book says.
The second argument is that it is presented by Vyasa. Thirdly, Vyasa presents Krsna as
an avatdra of the Lord. Therefore, Krsna is looked upon as an avatdra, a particular
form the Lord has assumed for achieving certain limited ends.
If the concept of avatdra is accepted, Krsna as an avatdra is Lord Ndrdyana,
Igvara himself. Therefore, when Krsna talks in the G'itd, isvara, the Lord, is talking.
What is said is the word of BhagavSn (bhagavad-vacana)and Bhagavdn is telling us
what the Veda says. This again makes the Gitd a pramina-granthafor the believers.
When Bhagavdn himself is talking about what is said in the Vedas, what else do we
want? Because the Gita is bhagavad-vacana,the word of Bhagavin, it is a pramdna.
THE MEANING OF BHAGAVAN
Bhagavidn is the one who has bhaga, the six-fold virtues in absolute measure.
These are: all knowledge, jiina; total dispassion, vairdgya; the capacity to create,
sustain, and resolve, virya; absolute fame, yaSas; all wealth, Srl; and overlordship,
aisvarya.
IPT: aP:4 aarF^T
III

^:

The one who has bhaga is called Bhagavan. It is said in the Visnu-puraina:
^WRUq'WWq (N^4~fI
3?H<f1

qwjU

-:
T

f'T: I
3TiT Ii~
1

aisuaryasyasamagrasya viryasya yadasah Sriyah

jinna-vairdgyayoscaivasannam bhaga itirand
(Visnu-purdna - 6. 5. 74)

Total and absolute overlordship, power, wealth, dispassion,fame
and knowledge are known as bhaga.

Introduction to the Bhagavadgita
To have all knowledge,jidana, is to be free from all ignorance. Thus the one who
has all jfina does not require a mind, perception, or a means of knowledge with which
to know. If we require a mind to know, there is always ignorance. Thus, whoever is
endowed with a mind in order to know cannot be Bhagavan. We will see later how it is
possible to be one with Bhagavan. Bhaga, therefore, isjiana,all knowledge.
Total, absolute, dispassion is also called bhaga. The one who has total, absolute
dispassion, vairagya, has no longing, no insecurity. He or she is full. Virya is absolute
power or Sakti meaning the capacity to create, to sustain, and to resolve. The one who
has this absolute power is called the Almighty.
Absolute fame, yaSas, means all fame, including your own or anyone else's. This
is also bhaga. One who is endowed with the ability to sing, for example, may gain some
fame, a ray of glory, but that fame belongs to the Lord, the one who has all fame. The
Lord also has all wealth, all resources - Sri. Any wealth you may have really belongs
to Bhagavan, the Lord, and you are only a trustee of whatever resources you happen to
have.
Finally, the one who is not caused, who is not ruled by anyone, who is not subject
to the laws of someone else, has the bhaga called aigvarya - overlordship. We, as
individuals have to go by the laws of nature; we cannot go against them. Even an
engineer who is responsible for planning, commissioning, and running a thermal plant
cannot touch a live wire without facing the consequences. In other words, the engineer
cannot behave as he or she likes merely because he or she caused the electricity to be
generated. It was because of the laws alone that the engineer was able to generate
electricity in the first place.
The one who does not subject himself to the law or laws of another is the Lord. If
the Lord is ruled by someone else, then that someone else becomes the Lord; and it is
this Lord that we are talking about. These six absolute virtues, then, constitute bhaga
and the one who has this six-fold bhaga is Bhagavan.
BHAGAVADGITT; THE LORD'S SONG
There are a variety of Gitas - the Anugita, Uttaragitd, Kamagitd,
Pand.avagitd, Hamsagitd, Siddhagitd, Rdmagitd, Uddhavagitd, GaneSagita, etc.;
but the most popular one is the Bhagavadgitd.
The title Bhagavadgitd means the song (gitd) of the Lord (Bhagavan). It is
considered a song because it is in the form of verse and therefore pleasing. It has only
two meters - anustubh and tristubh, making the Gltd easy to recite and remember.
The Gitd is also pleasing because it has a subject matter that is highly desirable to all.
The word Bhagavadgitd is feminine in gender because the Veda, the word sruti,
is feminine, further revealing that, what is said in the Gitd is said in the sruti. And who

Bhagavadgita
is Bhagavdn here? Krsna is Bhagavdn. Krsna is the one who has proved that he has
the six-fold bhaga and is therefore looked upon as Bhagavin. Once you understand the
meaning of Bhagavin as the one who has bhaga, Krsna being Bhagavan presents no
problem at all.
One can look at the title Bhagavadgitd in an another way - as a song that has
Bhagavdn as its subject matter. This is similar to saying 'electronic knowledge,' knowledge whose subject matter is electronics. Therefore, we can take the title,
as
Bhagavadgita, to mean either Bhagavdn's gitd or a gitd (song) that has Bhagavan
its subject matter.
THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE GITA
This Bhagavadgita, with Bhagavdn as its subject matter, actually has two
One is
aspects, because both a life of activity and a life of renunciation are presented.
yoga-istra in that it talks about karma-yoga and the other is brahma-vidyi,
knowledge of Brahman. Its subject matter, therefore, implies both activity and the
renunciation of activity.
Since both the life-styles are meant for brahma-vidyd, brahma-vidyd is its real
of
subject matter. It is this brahma-vidyd, that is pursued by a sannydsi to the exclusion
all else - a sannydsi being the one who has given up all karmas.
While a sannydsi pursues only brahma-vidyd, a karma-yogi pursues brahmaattitude
vidyd plus karma. How does a karma-yogi pursue karma? With a certain
brahmaboth
Because
her.
or
whereby the karma that is done becomes yoga for him
vidyd and karma-yoga are found in the Gitt, its subject matter is two-fold - brahmavidyi and yoga-sdstra.
BRAHMA-VIDYA: KNOWLEDGE OF WHAT IS
Brahma-vidyd means, the knowledge of what is. What is Brahman? What is
Isvara, the Lord? What is the reality of the world, jagat? What is the nature of the
individual, jiva? What is the truth of oneself, dtmn? What is the relationship between
the jiva, the jagat and Ihvara? What is the reality of each of them? Is there anything
common among them? Are they all one or are they separate entities? Brahma-vidya,
knowledge of Brahman, reveals all of this.
To gain this brahma-vidyd, there are certain qualifications mentioned, which
karma-yoga alone can provide. To help one gain these qualifications, karma-yoga is
discussed in detail in the Gitd. Because both karma-yoga and brahma-vidy are dealt
with, the Gita is considered complete and referred to as git6adstra.
This is what is meant by one particular verse praising the Gitd: gitd sugita
kartavyd kim anyaih adstra-vistaraih- the Gita has to be studied well; what is the

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
use of studying other elaborate works? The completeness of the subject matter unfolded
by the Gita is highlighted here.

People always say that whenever they are in trouble, they go to the Gita and their
problem is solved. Maybe they do find answers in the Gita because one can read into it

whatever one wants. Be that as it may, the Gita has something of its own to give. Do you
want what it has to give? That is the question.
UNDERSTANDING THE GITA
To know what the Glta says requires inquiry, vicara. In the introduction to his
commentary on the Gita, Sankara says:

tadidarngitdasastramsamasta-veddrtha-s ra-sarigrahabhiitam
durvijiieyartham
The sense of the gita-sasatra,which is in the form of the essence of the
meanings of all the words of the Vedas, is difficult to grasp.

TO- MN MR |
<H')=hlc-fe:a

m
sM : fcTqf-f^l^
Ict^-^rpT^ 3rfq 'S4
-fk JftL;i^^P o ^ 3r fNtibc: 3a4Pqhu|1 #Oqf-:
fNw*

tadartha-aviskaranayaanekaih vivrta-pada-padartha-vdkyartha-nydyam
api atyanta-viruddha-anekdrthatvenalaukikaihgrhyamanam upalabhya
aham vivekatah arthanirdhdranartham
sanksepatahvivaranam
karisyymi.
By many commentators, in an effort to clearly expound its meaning, this
has been expounded in the form of treatises that deal with the words of
this text, the meanings of the words, the meanings of the sentences, the
logic involved, etc. Seeing that they are fraught with vagueness and
contradictions, in order to ascertain the correct meaning with due
discrimination, I am writing this brief commentary.
The essence of any knowledge is sometimes expressed too cryptically to be
understood. Because the Gita is the.essence, one naturally has to know the entire asstra

to fully appreciate what the Gita is saying. Even though Arjuna had a certain
background, it was not easy for him to understand. He had to ask questions. If it was not
easy for Arjuna, it is definitely not going to be easy for someone in our own time who
does not have the same background, being so far removed from both Arjuna and the
Vedas. For such a person, the Gita will be as difficult to understand as any other text of

Bhagavadgita
Veddnta. The knowledge of oneself is in the form of words. But since the subject matter
is something very unique, the knowledge is not easily accessible through words. At the
same time, words are employed to reveal the self immediately. Therefore, one requires
not only the teaching, Vedanta, as a pramdna,but also a teacher, a guru.
THE NEED FOR A TEACHER
There are two letters in the word guru, 'gu' meaning darkness or ignorance, and
'ru' meaning the one who removes it. Thus, a guru is one who removes darkness of
ignorance by teaching the sdstra. The teaching is the dstra and the teacher is also the
sdstra. As a teacher, then, I do not use the idstra; rather, what I teach is sdstra.
What does this mean? The teaching itself comes to life when it is handled in a
certain way. Otherwise, all you have are so many dead words. Even though the teaching
is a pramana,there is a methodology employed for unfolding the words. A teacher, a
guru, is one who is able to unfold the meaning of these words. The words are already
there and their meanings are already there. They need only to be unfolded for your
comprehension, just as an artist unfolds his vision on the canvas.
WHO IS THE FIRST GURU?
The problem then is - who is the first guru? I answer that question by asking,
'Who is the first father?' When you tell me who the first father is, I will tell you who the
first guru is. Either way, it is the same. Thus, if you say that the Lord the creator is the
father, then, he also must have a father, which means that he cannot be the Creator.
Therefore, there is no father for the one whom you call the Lord.
Someone claimed that the first father was a monkey, which is an inferential
conclusion. You will find, however, that this monkey also had a father, who had a father,
who had a father, until finally you give up. Because you are into infinite regression, you
had better give up! Or you may decide that the first father was one who was not a son.
He was only a father, one we call the Lord.
Thus if we assume that the first father is the Lord, then, the first guru is not going
to be different from that Lord. And, from the Lord downward, there is a teacher-student
lineage, called guru-Sisya-parampard. The entire parampard is praised in the
following verse :

saddSivasamdrambhadm Sankardcdryamadhyamdm
asmaddcdryaparyantd.mvande guruparampardm

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
I salute the lineage of teachers, beginning with Siva, the Lord, (linked
by) Saikaracdrya in the middle, and extending down to my own
teacher.
Thus, when you salute the teacher, your salutation goes to the Lord in whom the
lineage has its beginning. To point out one of the links, Sarikaracdryais mentioned as
being in the middle, meaning somewhere in the flow between the Lord and one's present
teacher. The word 'middle' having been used, there must also be an end. If the beginning
is Lord Siva meaning the Lord, one who is all fullness, all knowledge, and the middle is
Sahkaracdrya,then who is the end? - my teacher, asmaddcarya.
Because I am here today, I know there has been no break in the flow between the
first father and myself. Similarly, since this knowledge is coming to me right now, I
know it has been kept alive by one teacher giving it to another and, thus, there has been
no break between my teacher and the Lord. I salute this guru-parampard.
HOW TO CHOOSE A GURU
To choose a guru can also be a problem. Do you find the teacher with the longest
or the whitest beard? So much is said by so many, everyone claiming to know the truth.
Given all this confusion, first and foremost, I would say that the best teacher is one who
looks at the whole human problem as an error.
If someone says you have a problem, then that person is going to manipulate you.
If, however, the person says that the problem that you seem to have is an error, then he
or she is objective. And, if the problem is real, no one will be able to resolve it.
If the situation is factually real, how can it be changed? If I am really an
inadequate and limited person, then there is no way of my solving the problem of
inadequacy, with or without help. The limited is always limited. But, here, there is no
need to say, 'if I am a fraction of the whole, I will always be a fraction of the whole.' If I
am the whole, the conclusion that I am a fraction is an error and the way out is to see
myself in the proper light. Thus, the one who says the problem is an error and that it is a
universal error, not your own personal error, may be a guru.
In order to know that I am the whole and therefore acceptable to myself, it is said,
'May one go to a teacher, gurum abhigacchet.' What kind of a teacher? The Veda itself
says that, the teacher should be one who is well informed in this teaching and who is
well rooted in this knowledge - one who is a Srotriya and a brahma-nistha.' But how

1

?feil-^T
-9

cTt fiTr~ dff4Cqfr: lshN S9i0

I

tadvijiandirthamsa gurumevdbhigacchetsamitpanih grotriyam brahmanistham.
(Mundakopanisad- 1.2. 12)

Bhagavadgita
do I know whether someone is well informed or not? If I want to study higher
mathematics and do research in topology, I need only find someone who has studied
higher mathematics and specialised in topology. If I find a person who has published
numerous credible papers on topology, I can assume that he or she knows the subject
matter. I can then decide to study with this person until he or she proves otherwise.
In guru-seeking, however, there is a problem because this knowledge, being
spiritual knowledge, is different. How do you know the person has this knowledge and
has undergone the discipline of learning unless you already know something of it
yourself?
The society should be informed enough for one to be able to find out whether a
person knows or only pretends to know. The person could also be deluded, not
pretending to know, but thinking he or she knows. Such people do not know what they
do not know.
Previously, in Indian society, this was not a problem because everyone is supposed
to become a sanny si eventually. One did not start another life after retirement. But
nowadays, people plan their retirements early. Still, the best retirement plan to be ever
conceived is sannylisa, which was meant to be the last stage of one's life. Having been
married and so on, the time comes when you just walk out - not because of a quarrel or
because you want to marry another person. Walking out is considered a part of married
life and is appreciated by both husband and wife as its ultimate aim. At this stage, they
have matured and are independent enough for a life of sannydsa.
This kind of retirement plan requires no social security, only the maturity to walk
out as a renunciate. Since the Indian society respects the sannyisa stage of life and the
Veda enjoins it, naturally the basic needs of a sannydsi are taken care of by the society.
Although some people postpone this stage of life, every one is expected to become a
sannyasi in the end.
THE GURU AS A RENUNCIATE
To be a sannyisi means that one already has the knowledge or is seeking it. Even
as a householder, one is supposed to study in order to gain self-knowledge. Once a
person becomes a sannyasi, he or she has no daily duties, except studying and teaching.
Thus, in every village, you will find a few sannyasis coming and going, or permanently
staying there, so that the society knows who knows what, just as we know who is a
professor of mathematics and who is not. To do research in mathematics or electronics,
we have no doubts about whom we should go to and which institution we should attend.

Forgaining that knowledge, may one properly approach a teacher who is a Srotriya and a
brahmanistha.

Introduction to the Bhagavadgita
There is, therefore, no problem in choosing a teacher for such knowledge in such a
society.
If you know exactly what you are seeking and whether or not the person is
recognised as having the knowledge, to that extent, you can know whether the person
knows or not. However, if people do not know these things, then they are totally gullible,
in spite of their expertise in other fields. For such people, anyone can pass as a guru.
A person who has undergone this discipline of knowledge is a scholarly person
and is called a hrotriya. Therefore a guru is a scholar, whereas a scholar need not be a
guru. To be a guru, a committed pursuit is also necessary. One who is committed to this
knowledge is called a brahma-nistha.This is an important point to understand.
If the knowledge is used to gain security, the person is insecure. Moreover,
because the knowledge is 'I am secure,' the person does not really know anything about
it and is therefore not qualified to teach it. Such a person is self-seeking and has no
knowledge to give you. All that he or she can give is a collection of words, for which
you do not require a teacher. You need only a book and a dictionary!
The teacher you require is one who employs these words and makes them
meaningful. To do this, a teacher must necessarily be free from being insecure so that he
or she is not seeking recognition or security. The proof of a teacher's knowledge is in the
teaching methodology, in the person's communicative ability and the content of what he
or she communicates. Thus, you go to a teacher who is well informed in this teaching
and one who is committed to it, one who has no other pursuit.
And how should you go to a teacher? With an attitude that indicates you are ready
to serve the teacher, meaning you are ready to do what is to be done in order to gain this
knowledge because of your love for it. Nothing is too much and no distance is too far.
This attitude is not damaging to you because you have chosen the right teacher. Hence
there is no question of the person exploiting you if he or she is a guru - true to the
definition of the word guru. A guru exploits no one. Thus, whatever you can do, you
will do. That is your attitude. Only then can the teaching begin.
THE GITA AS A DIALOGUE
The entire Gita is a dialogue. In fact, all the teaching is in the form of a dialogue,
although the methodology of the teaching does not necessitate the presentation of
characters and the dialogues between them. After all, we are not interested in knowing
the names of the teacher or the taught. We are only interested in the teaching itself. But,
then, the characters involved in the dialogue are presented in the form of a story, an
akhyayika, in order to tell us something about ourselves.
We find the same approach in the Upanisads where many names of people are
cited. If tat tvam asi - that thou art, is the message, why not just talk about that

Bhagavadgita
message? Why are all these stories brought in? Only to reveal the method of teaching,
the sampraddya,how we have to learn, and what type of knowledge it is.

THE FOUR TYPES OF DIALOGUES
There are different types of dialogues. One is a discussion involving two or more
people who are interested in finding out the facts about a certain subject matter. They are
all exploring. In this type of discussion, there is no teacher-student relationship. Each
person is equally placed, even though one person may know a little more than the others
about the subject matter. They are all interested in understanding. This kind of discussion
among equals, any collective study among students, for example, is called vZda and is
naturally healthy and is traditionally an important component of study. It is said that a
student gains a quarter of his knowledge by such discussion.1
There are also two unhealthy types of dialogue that we should be aware of. One is
the dialogue that takes place between two people who are already committed to different
beliefs. Such a discussion, called jalpa, is governed purely by each person's wit. Any
discussion between two fanatics falls into this category. Each of them is convinced that
the other person is totally wrong and tries to win the other over to his or her particular
belief, although there is no basis for the discussion.
Suppose you have a belief and I have another belief. Your belief may be right and
mine may be wrong. On the other hand, my belief may be right and yours may be wrong.
Or both of us may be wrong! Both of us may be right also! How, then, can either of us
insist that 'I alone am right'? The difference between a believer and a fanatic becomes
obvious here.
THE IMPORTANCE OF AN OPEN, INQUIRING MIND
The difference between a scientist and a believer is also worthy of notice. One
may adhere to a belief, but everyone must necessarily have a mind, which is open to

i With reference to gaining any empirical discipline of knowledge, there is a verse that
says:

qqqq
3nId^

1TMfww: *tATT I

lF59"0T1:: 7i 411hOZ1 - 11
q* 4
acaryatpadamadattepadam gisyah svamedhay5
padam sabrahmacdribhyahpadam kdlakramena ca
A student obtains one quarterfrom the teacher, one quarter by one's own intelligence, one
quarterfrom the fellow students, and one quarterin time.
The third quarter refers to vada.

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
explore and know. That open, inquiring mind, the mind of a scientist, is ah entirely
different mind from that of a believer.
We can and must respect the beliefs of others, but we cannot have a discussion
based on such beliefs. Both of us may be wrong. A discussion between two people, both
of whom are committed to certain beliefs, is purely a dialogue between two missionaries.
It is better to respect the other person's belief and have a simple human relationship.
Discussions are useless. All you can do is ask, 'What is your belief?' Some people are
curious. If you are curious, you can ask, but I myself would not ask because the other
person is acceptable to me, along with his or her beliefs. I need not know what they are.
This is a healthy attitude to have towards a person. But any discussion,jalpa, based on
beliefs, is useless. No one wins and no one loses. Each person always comes back with
better arguments. Jalpa-discussions, therefore, are useless; they have no value.
There is another type of discussion called vitanda, wherein one person makes a
statement with which the other person always disagrees. Why? Merely because the other
person said it. Due to jealousy or some other reason, one person always tries to prove the
other wrong. Such a discussion is also useless.
A fourth type of discussion, one that concerns us here, is called samnwda, a
discussion between a teacher and a student, guru-9isya-samvada.In the teacher-student
relationship, the student has already accepted the other person as a teacher and therefore
looks up to him or her. Although there is a dialogue between them, the attitude is entirely
different, the discussion being based on the student's acceptance that 'I am a student and
this person is my teacher.' This attitude prevails until or unless the person thought to be a
teacher proves to be otherwise.
The moment you discover the person has nothing to teach, you can become
friends. However, when you have to learn from someone, you look up to that person. If
you do not understand what the teacher is saying, you give the benefit of the doubt to the
teacher, even though he or she may sometimes appear to be contradictory, seeming to
have said something previously that is not in harmony with what is being said now, as
we will see in the Gitd.
DIALOGUE BETWEEN TEACHER AND STUDENT
In a guru-sisya-samvdda, the subject matter can be anything. Here, in the Gita,
the subject matter is brahma-vidyd and yoga-iastra - in one word, Vedanta. The guru
is Bhagavan Krsna, referred to as Vasudeva's son, and the student is Arjuna, called
Partha here because he is Prtha's son. He is also called Kaunteya, the son of Kuntl.
Arjuna has a number of other names - Dhanahijaya,Savyasac, GudakeSa, and so on,

but Arjuna is his popular name.

B.G. Vol.I- 3

Bhagavadgita
Between Arjuna, the student, and Lord Krsna, the teacher, there is a discussion
and Gitd is the body of knowledge being taught. Therefore, the Gita is called a
samvada.

GIVING THE TEACHER THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT
If it looks as though the teacher is being contradictory, the student gives the
benefit of the doubt to the teacher. This is what is expected of a student. As a student,
one need not take the blame upon oneself.
The teacher can be asked a question - 'Previously such and such was said and
now this is being said. Why is this difference?' You said Brahman is without qualities,
nirguna and now you say it is with qualities, saguna. How can Brahman be saguna?
You say it is beyond the mind, and that it is not available as an object for the mind. At
the same time, you say, one sees oneself, the atma with the mind (manasapamyati).
How can one see the atm with the mind? And how is one going to know that one is
seeing the atma? It looks as though the hruti herself is contradictory. To say that
Brahman cannot be objectified by the mind but has to be recognised by the mind seems
to be a contradiction. But it is not a contradiction; it is perfect. If it looks like a
contradiction to the student, then he or she can ask a question, a praina and when the
student waits for the right time to ask a question, it is called a paripraina,based on his
or her faith, Sraddha, in the teacher.
As a teacher, one cannot contradict oneself. A teacher who contradicts himself or
herself does not know the subject matter. Nor can a teacher simply learn along with a
student and teach, since this creates situations wherein both the teacher and the student
may suddenly discover a new fact never known to either of them before, a fact that
contradicts everything they knew thus far. This is not why one goes to a teacher.
Teaching is not meant to be exploratory. Therefore the teacher should know exactly what
he or she is talking about and not be contradictory.
The attitude implied by the term guru-disya-samvada is especially relevant here.
Since the entire teaching is itself a means of knowledge, it is not a philosophical
speculation. Moreover we are not attracted to this kind of learning out of a simple
academic interest. The teaching has a value and the value is myself alone. The teaching
is about myself. I have a value for freedom and this value makes me want to know. As a
person, I want to be free and I want to learn for no other purpose than to be free. Since
there is a value there, and the teaching itself is a means of knowledge, there must
necessarily be a certain attitude on my part towards this teaching and the teacher.
That the teaching has to come from a teacher in the form of a dialogue is because
it is something to be understood - something to be followed, not swallowed. In a belief,
there is nothing to follow, only something to swallow, something to accept totally,
without question. Any questioning that may take place is meant only to establish what

Introduction to the Bhagauadgitd
the belief is, which is not really questioning at all. This is why there are so many
attempts to establish historical proofs that a certain person existed. Whether someone
existed or not is not the issue. The teaching is the issue.
Therefore, if you look into the teaching, if you are interested in what is being
taught, your whole attitude and approach will be different. Here, a dialogue implies a
teaching that is received from a teacher, meaning that this knowledge has to be received
from a teacher and the subject matter has to be understood.
TWO TYPES OF SUBJECT MATTER
There are two types of subject matter, sddhya-visaya and siddha-visaya.Sadhya

is that which is yet to be accomplished and is accomplished by doing something - by an
action. If you want to know how to go to heaven, for example, first you have to know
what heaven is and then you have to decide to buy a ticket. You are told that pu~nya, the
ticket for heaven can be gained by doing good deeds. You must also hold on to the
puinya you have earned, which means that you must not do any improper actions, papa,
while you are earning your ticket to heaven. Only then will you go to heaven after death.
All this is very straightforward for a person who has Sraddha in the Veda being a
pramanaand is not something that can be logically arrived at.
Any question related to sadhya is only to understand how to do something, like
cooking, for example. An Indian woman who wants to know how to make pizza will ask
certain questions. The situation is very simple - you just tell her how to do it a few
times until she knows how and the topic is over. It is just a matter of whether she has
understood what you have said. There is an order governing how everything is to be
done. Certain elements are involved and, therefore, must be understood. What has to be
done is also to be understood. And that's the end of it. One may do it or not do it. By
practice, one eventually acquires the knack of it. If a person keeps on making pizza,
hopefully with some sympathetic people around, he or she will certainly master the art of
pizza making.
This is sadhya, then. There is no questioning here. When the subject matter is
something you have to accomplish later, when it is dealing with means and ends
(sadhanaand sadhya), proper questioning is not a part of the whole approach. This is
true even if the subject matter is a Vedic ritual.
Again, when it comes to actions there are many choices available. You can do it
this way or that way; you need not do it at all; or you can do something else entirely and
achieve the same result.'
-T4 -

Wd WWR a9r* Wq3ZR

^T ^

W

karma - karturm akyam, akartum sakyam, anyathi va kartum sakyam.
Action - may be done, may not be done or may be done differently.

Bhagavadgitd
There is more than one way to go to heaven. There are a hundred different ways,
one of which one can choose. Why anyone would want to go is another matter. Thus,
when a sddhya-visaya is involved, there can be choice. But this is not so with a siddhavisaya.
NO CHOICE IN KNOWLEDGE

There is no choice involved, however, when what is to be accomplished is already
accomplished, siddha, but not understood. Unlike action, knowledge is not open to
choice; it is always true to its object. For example, knowledge of an apple is always true
to the object - apple, even if I will it to be otherwise. Nor do I have a choice in
knowledge, once the means of knowledge and the object of knowledge are aligned. If my
eyes are open, and if they are not defective, and if the mind is not elsewhere, I will
necessarily see what is in front of me. What choice do I have?
To know an already accomplished fact requires proper questioning in order to
remove whatever that may be blocking the knowledge from taking place. Why should
you be denied the knowledge of yourself once it is unfolded? What exactly is the
obstruction? Is it that you do not follow what is being said? Once the obstructions have
been identified, they have to be removed, one by one, because you are Brahman. The
whole pursuit, then, is one of removing all doubts.
Because this is the knowledge of an already accomplished fact, the knowledge has
to be immediate; it cannot be indirect. If it does not happen in spite of the teaching, then
there is some obstruction, which is in the form of error, vagueness, or doubt. The
obstructions are removed in the dialogue between the teacher and the student.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF QUESTIONING

Where there is understanding involved, questioning is imperative. This does not
mean that you should question all the time. What is meant is that a questioning mind is
necessary because, without questioning, you can never gain clarity. Therefore, the
teaching itself consists of a number of questions. As teachers, we ourselves raise
questions and keep answering them. If the student still has questions, he or she should
ask those questions ih order to know, since we are not dealing with simple belief here.
And if we find that something is a belief, we can say, 'This is a belief,' thereby ending
the matter.
We do not try to establish a belief, beyond establishing that it is a belief. For
example, the statement, 'This is my mother,' is a belief because there is no way of
proving it. How do you know two babies were not switched? There may be a lot of
corroborative evidence, but still it is a belief. It is not direct perception. There are many
beliefs and there is nothing wrong with beliefs - as long as we understand them as
beliefs. However, there are also many things we have to know, and where we have to

Introductionto the Bhagavadgita
know questions are very important and are allowed. The Gitd was presented as a
dialogue between a teacher and a student to emphasise that the subject matter is one for
understanding, not for believing.
COMMENTARIES ON THE GITA
Saikaira says that he is writing this commentary on the Gltd so that people could
analyse and understand what the true meaning of the gitd-9stra is, although it had
already been so elaborately commented upon by others. These earlier commentaries, no
matter how definitive they were, sometimes differed from one another, and, in some
cases, were even opposed to each other. Since these various works were confusing to
those who did not have a clear understanding of the aistra, Sahkara decided to
undertake this work in order to clarify what the Gita is actually saying.
Since Saakara'stime, there have been numerous commentaries and translations in
various languages with varying degrees of clarity. None has matched Sahkara'sanalysis
of the Gitd. His commentary is extremely cogent and consistent from the beginning to
the end. For instance, whenever the topic of bhakti comes up, he discusses it, in its
proper context. Wherever Isvara is mentioned, even though Lord Krsnia uses the first
person singular, ahikara makes it very clear that, what was meant was the Lord,
Ivara, paramrdtm .
When the Gltd is analysed properly, the analysis must be rational. It should not go
against reason. A commentary on the Glta should be in keeping with the words that are
there. It should honour all the rules of grammar and syntax. What was said before and
what is said later should also be taken into account.
THE NEED FOR INQUIRY
Since the Glta is a book that contains only what is said in the Upanisads,this is
all the more reason for any commentary on it to be reasonable. Nothing should contradict
the source book. Our understanding of the Gltd should definitely be in keeping with all
these various factors. Only then can there be real understanding. Whether the Gitd says
this or that is something that must be understood. We are not trying to make the Gitd say
what we want to say. We are trying to understand what it says and, for this, we need to
inquire and be objective.
This is why before approaching the Gltd, a few verses called the Gita-dhydnam
are sung in praise of it, whereby we invoke the Mother Gita to reveal the truth contained
in the gitd-9dstra. These verses are a prayer to the Gita herself, to the Gitd as the mother
Sruti and to the Gltd as Bhagavan, the Lord. It is only after we have invoked the Gitd in
this way, do we try to extract the exact meaning of what the Gltd has to say.

Bhagavadgia
The Gita is like a mirror, just as the Upanisads are a mirror of words wherein we
can see ourselves very clearly. If the world is not separate from me and if !9vara also is
not separate from me, then I should be able to see this truth in the words of the Glta. The
prayer is for the sake of understanding the Gita properly, which is understanding myself.
In the brief discussion of the Gita-dhyana-verses that follow, you will come
across sentences requiring further elucidation and more clarity in order for you to enjoy
their meaning completely. This clarity will come as the G1ta is unfolded.

