Discourses on Gita
~ By Acharya Vinoba Bhave

INTRODUCTION : THE YOGA OF DESPONDENCY
At the heart of the Mahabharata
Dear Brothers,
1. From today, I shall speak to you about Srimad Bhagavad Gita. The bond between the Gita and me transcends
reason. My heart and mind have both received more nourishment from the Gita than my body has from my mother's
milk. Where the heart is touched, there is no room for argument. Leaving logic behind, I beat the twin wings of
faith and practice and, to the best of my ability, fly up into the heavens of the Gita.
I live and move in the atmosphere of the Gita. The Gita is my life's breath. To vary the image, I swim in the sea of
the Gita when I speak of it; but when I am alone, I dive to the depths of this ocean of nectar and there rest at
ease. It has been decided that I should tell you every Sunday the story of this Mother, the Gita.
2. The Gita has been set in the Mahabharata. Standing in the middle of the epic, the Gita is like an elevated lamp
which throws its light on the whole of the Mahabharata. On one side of it, there are six parvas (chapters) and on
the other, twelve. Similarly on one side there are seven divisions of the army, and on the other, eleven. In
between, the Gita is being taught
3. The Mahabharata and the Ramayana are the classics of our nation. The characters that figure in them have
become one with our lives. For thousands of years now the whole of Indian life has been, as it were, consecrated by
the heroes and heroines of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata like Rama, Sita, Dharmaraj, Draupadi, Bhishma and
Hanuman. The characters of no other classics in the world have thus blended with the lives of the people.
Looked at in this way the Mahabharata and the Ramayana are undoubtedly wonderful works. If the Ramayana is an
enthralling ethical poem, the Mahabharata is a comprehensive treatise on the science of society. Vyasa has in his
hundred thousand slokas given us innumerable portraits, customs and heroic actions which are as beautiful as they
are real. The Mahabharata tells us clearly that none but God is wholly free from blemish; that none too is an
embodiment of absolute evil.
On the one hand, faults are pointed
out even in Bhishma and Yudhishthira, and, on the other, light is out shed on the good points of Karna and,
Duryodhana. The Mahabharata describes human life as a fabric woven out of both black and white threads. Himself
standing aloof, Bhagavan Vyasa projects on the screen of the world a picture, made up of both light and shade of
the universal movement. Because of this perfect detachment and the big literary skill of Vyasa, the Mahabharata
has turned out to be a huge mine containing pure gold. Let us now explore it and carry away from it all the wealth
we can.
4. The Mahabharata has become a byword for bigness; but has not Vyasa anything of his own to tell us? Has he
given in any place any special message of his own? Where is Vyasa's heart beat to be heard? Again and again we
come to jungle upon jungle of philosophy and preaching in the Mahabharata; but has he also given anywhere the
essence of all this, the central secret of this massive work? Yes, he has. Vyasa has, so to speak, taken out the
cream of the whole of Mahabharata and put it in the Gita.
The Gita forms the epitome of the
teaching of Vyasa, the quintessence of his thought. That is why Sri Krishna says; "I am Vyasa among the sages."
This manifestation of Krishna in Vyasa becomes fullest in the Gita. From ancient times the Gita has been given the
status of an Upanishad. The Gita is the Upanishad of Upanishads, because Lord Krishna has drawn the milk of all

the Upanishads and given it in the form of the Gita to the whole world; Arjuna is only an excuse. Almost every idea
necessary for the flowering of a full life occurs in the pages of the Gita. That is why men of experience have said,
truly, that the Gita is a treasure house of the knowledge of dharma. Though small in size, the Gita is an important
text of Hindu dharma.
5. Everyone knows that the Gita was spoken by Sri Krishna. The devotee Arjuna, who listened to this great lesson,
became so identified with it that he too came to be called 'Krishna'. Vyasa, trying to express the heart of the Lord
and his lover, lost himself so completely that he too came to be called 'Krishna'. The speaker is Krishna, the
listener is Krishna, the reporter is Krishna - thus all the three have, so to speak, become one, each fulfilling
himself in this oneness. To study the Gita, then, a concentration of this kind is necessary.
Arjuna's stand
6. Some people think that the Gita should be taken to begin from the Second Chapter. If the actual teaching
commences in the eleventh sloka of the Second Chapter, why not start from there? Someone even told me, "God
has said that He manifests himself in 'a' among the letters of Nagari alphabet. Here the sloka
'asochyaananyasochastvam' begins spontaneously with the letter 'a'. So we should take that as the beginning."
Apart from this argument, in many ways it would be quite right to take this as the beginning. All the same the
introductory portion preceding this does have a value of its own. Without this preliminary narrative we cannot
properly understand where exactly Arjuna stands and what the Gita is intended to teach.
7. Some say that Gita was spoken in order to remove Arjuna's weakness and make him enter the battle. In their
views the Gita not only teaches karma-yoga, the way of action, but also yuddha-yoga, the way of conflict. But a
little thinking will show us how defective this argument is. Eighteen divisions of warriors were ready for battle.
Are we to suppose that, by making Arjuna listen to the whole of the Gita, the Lord made him worthy of the army?
It was Arjuna who quailed, not the army. Was the army then more worthy than Arjuna?
This is utterly inconceivable. It was not out of fear that Arjuna was turning away from the battle. He was a great
warrior, who had proved his valour on a hundred fields. When Uttara's cattle were carried off, he routed Bhishma,
Drona and Karna single handed. He was known as the undefeated, as the one true man among men. Heroism was in
every drop of his blood, in the very marrow of his bones.
In order to rouse his feeling and goad him to action, Krishna Himself attributed cowardice to him, but this missed
the mark. Then he had to change His tactics and give a discourse on ultimate wisdom and immediate knowledge. So
then it is clear that the aim of the Gita is not anything so easy and simple as removing cowardice.
8. Still others say that the Gita is meant to cure Arjuna of his scruples based on non-violence and make him inclined
to fight. In my opinion this view also is not right. In order to examine this thoroughly, we have first to see the
stand taken by Arjuna. To do this, the First Chapter and its continuation in the Second will help us greatly. Arjuna
stood in the field of battle with his mind made up, and sustained by a sense of duty. Fighting, the calling of the
Kshatriyas, was in his very nature. All possible attempts had been made to avoid war, but they had not succeeded.
They had pitched their claims at the lowest, and Sri Krishna himself had tried to mediate; but all in vain.
In these circumstances he has got together the kings of many countries, taken Sri Krishna as his charioteer, and is
standing on the battle field. He says to Sri Krishna with heroic ardor: "Place my chariot between the two armies so
that I can look at the faces of the people who have come out ready to fight with me." Krishna did as he was told,
what does Arjuna see when he turns his gaze in all directions? On both sides are gathered a thick surging throngs
of his own kinsmen and friends. He sees grandfathers, fathers, sons and grandsons, four generations of his own
people - family, friends and relations - finally determined to kill and be killed.
It was not as though he had not expected this. But the actual experience strikes one with the force of afresh
impact. When he sees all his own people gathered together, a storm begins to rage in his heart. He feels downcast.
In the past, he had killed innumerable warriors in many a battle. But never till now had he felt so miserable, never
had his bow, Gandiva, slipped from his hands nor had his body quaked like this, nor his eyes became wet. Then, why

did all this happen now? Was he moved by the spirit of non - violence now, as Ashoka was to be later? No, this was
only attachment to his own people.
Even now, if those in front of him had not been his teachers, kinsmen and friends he would have made their
severed heads fly like so many balls. But his attachment confused him and overshadowed his devotion to duty; it
was then that he thought of philosophy. When a man with a sense of duty is caught in illusion, even then he cannot
bear to face the naked fact of his lapse from duty. He usually covers it up with an inquiry into principles. Arjuna
was just in this plight. He began to declare ostentatiously that war was really a sin, that war would destroy the
race, main dharma, encourage moral anarchy, spread antinomianism, disturb the seasons and bring many other
disasters upon society. With such arguments he tried to enlighten Krishna Himself.
9. Here I am reminded of the story of a judge. He had sent hundreds of criminals to the gallows, but one day his
own son was produced before him, accused of murder. His guilt was proved beyond doubt, the time had now come
for the judge to pass sentence of death on his own son. But then he began to hesitate. He called all his ingenuity to
his aid and began to argue thus: "The death penalty is most inhuman; inflicting such punishment is no credit to man.
All hope of reform is destroyed.
The man who committed murder did so in the heat of excitement when he was beside himself. When the madness
has passed from him, to take him coolly and calmly to the gallows and kill him is a disgrace to human society; it is a
great crime." He thought up many such arguments. If his own son had not been brought before him, the Honorable
Judge would have gone on relentlessly condemning people to death for the rest of his life. But now, because of
partiality for his own son, he argued thus. This was not the voice of his inmost self; it was born of his attachment.
"This is my son", he thought; and from this sense of attachment sprang all those high-sounding words.
10. Arjuna's behavior was like that of the judge in the story. The argument advanced by him were not in
themselves wrong. The whole world has seen precisely these consequences follow the last Great War. But what we
should think about is this: that Arjuna had no real vision, it was only clever and superficial talk. So, without paying
any attention to Arjuna's words, He straight-away began to set about dispelling his illusion.
If Arjuna had actually been converted to non-violence, he would never have been satisfied until his real point had
been met, however much he was told about wisdom and knowledge. But the Gita has nowhere answered this point of
his, and yet Arjuna was satisfied. The implication of all this is that Arjuna's attitude was not that of non-violence;
he did believe in fighting. As he saw it, fighting was his natural, clear and inescapable duty. But he wanted to evade
this duty because his vision was clouded by illusion. And it is on this illusion that Gita's mace falls most heavily.
The purpose of the Gita: To destroy Illusion
11. Arjuna used not merely the language of non-violence, but even that of sannyasa, complete renunciation. "Even a
life of renunciation is better than this bloodstained Kshatriya dharma, duty of the warrior class," he says. But was
this the way of life for him, his svadharma? Was this the true expression of his nature? Arjuna could have
cheerfully donned the garb of a Sannyasi but how could he have lived the life? If, in the name of sannyasa, he went
into the forest he would start killing the deer there.
Therefore, the Lord told him plainly, "Arjuna, your present reluctance to fight is delusion. The nature that has
become yours through the years will not permit you to refrain from fighting." Arjuna felt at odds with his
svadharma. But however unattractive a man's svadharma may be, he has to find fulfillment by persisting in it.
Because it is only through such persistence that growth is possible. There is no question of dignity involved here.
This is the law of growth. Svadharma is not the sort of thingthat one takes up because one thinks it is noble or
gives up because it seems lowly.
In the words of the Gita, "sreyaan svadharma vigunah." (One's own dharma, even if devoid of merit, is the best for
oneself.") The word "dharma" means not the organized religions, like Hindu-dharma or Muslim-dharma, or Christian
- dharma. Every individual has his own distinct dharma. The 200 people who are in front of me have 200 different
dharmas. Even my own dharma today is not what it was ten years ago; it will not be the same ten years hence. As
the course of one's life changes through thinking and experience one's old dharma drops off and a new dharma
comes in its place. One achieves nothing by self-willed obstinacy in this matter.

12. However superior another's dharma may appear to be, it is not good for me to adopt it. The light of the sun is
dear to me. By this light I keep growing. The sun claims my worship too. But if, for this reason, I wish to give up
living on the earth and, go to the sun, I would be burnt to ashes. On the other hand, even if living on earth is quite
dull by comparison, - even if the earth is quite despicable when compared with the sun, even if it has to borrow its
light - even then, so long as I lack the capacity to stand the sun's blaze, I shall have to stay away from the sun and
keep growing on the earth. If someone were to say to a fish, "Milk is costlier than water; come and live in this
milk," would it agree? Fish can only live in water; they will die in milk.
13. Even if someone else's dharma seems easier, one should not take it up. Quite often, it only appears easier. If a
man in household life is not able to look after his children properly and, getting disgusted, gives up the world, it will
turn out to be hypocrisy and will even become burdensome. At the first opportunity, his old habits and associations
will re-assert themselves. When a man goes into the forest because he is unable to bear life's burdens, the first
thing he would do there is to build himself a small hut. Then, to protect it, he would put up a fence.
Going on thus, he finds that there too he has to manage, if anything, a bigger household. If a man's mind is truly
detached, surely renunciation is not difficult for him. There are many texts in the Smritis (sacred codes) which
show how renunciation can be easy. It is really a question of one's vocation. One's dharma consists in following
one's true vocation. The question is not whether it is high or low, easy or difficult. The growth must be real and
fulfillment genuine.
14. But some imaginative people ask, "If sannyasa, the way of renunciation, is really better than yuddha dharma, the
way of conflict, why did Lord Krishna not make Arjuna a true sannyasi straightway? Was this impossible for Him?"
Of course, there was nothing that He could not do. But, in that case, what would be the meaning and purpose of
Arjuna's life? What does he achieve himself? Almighty God has given us freedom.
And so, let every man make his own efforts; for that is where the fun lies. Children find joy in drawing pictures
themselves. They do not like someone else holding their hand and drawing the picture for them. If the teacher
gives the answer to all the questions put to the child, how is the child's mind to grow? So the work of the teacher
and the parents is only to make him attend, and help him with suggestions. God guides us all from within. He does no
more than this. If, like a potter, He were to beat our clay and mould each of us into a pot, where is the sense in it?
We are not just pots of clay. We are the living consciousness.
15. From all this discussion, you would have understood that the purpose of the Gita is to remove the illusion that
stands between us and our svadharma. Arjuna was perplexed about his dharma, a delusion had arisen in his mind
over his svadharma. As soon as Sri Krishna points this out, Arjuna himself admits it. The Gita's main task is to
remove this illusion, this sense of "mine", this attachment.
This is why, after Arjuna has listened to the whole of the Gita, Sri Krishna asks him, "Arjuna, you have got over
the illusion, haven't you?" And Arjuna replies, "Yes, Lord. The illusion has left me; my svadharma is clear to me." If
then we put together the beginning and the end of the Gita, we see that its aim and effect is to remove illusion.
This is true not only of the Gita, but of the whole of the Mahabharata. Vyasa said right at the beginning of the
Mahabharata, "In this epic, I am lighting a lamp to dispel the dark illusion that covers the heart of humanity."
Who qualifies - the Pure of Heart
16. The introduction, which tells us about Arjuna's stand, has helped us greatly in understanding the rest of the
Gita. We should, of course, feel grateful for this. But it helps us in another way too. In this introducing Arjuna,
the Gita reveals to us the innocence and straightforwardness of his mind. The word "Arjuna" itself means one who
is candid, straight and simple by nature. He opened out his heart and laid bare before the Lord all that he felt and
thought. He kept nothing hidden and, in the end, he surrendered himself to Sri Krishna.
But to tell the truth, he had surrendered himself even at the beginning. When he mad Krishna his charioteer and
entrusted His hands the reins of his horses, even then, he had got ready to give into His hands the control of his
mind and heart. Come, let us also do it. Let us not say, "Arjuna had Krishna. Where are we to find our Krishna?" Let
us not get caught in the fallacy of historicity, that there was an individual called "Krishna". Krishna shines in the
heart of each of us, the Inner Ruler. He is nearer to us than the nearest.

So then, let us place all the flaws and falsehoods of our heart before Him and say, "Oh Lord, I take refuge in you.
You are my sole master, my guru. Show me the right way. I shall tread only the path you show." If we do so, He who
drove Arjuna's chariot will drive ours too, we ourselves shall hear the Gita in His own voice, and He will lead us to
victory .
THE TEACHING IN BRIEF : SELF-KNOWLEDGE AND EQUANIMITY
The special terminology of Gita
1. Brothers, in the last Chapter we saw Arjuna's "yoga of despondency." When it is accompanied by innocence honesty and simplicity - and surrender to God such as Arjuna's, even despondency becomes a yoga, a means of union
with God. This is what is called "The Churning of the Heart." I have not called this stage "the yoga of Arjuna's
despondency," with specific reference to Arjuna, the practitioner of the yoga but I have given it the general name
of "the yoga of despondency."
Because, for the Gita Arjuna is only the occasion. We should not think that Lord Pandurang came down to
Pandharpur in Maharashtra for the sake of Pundalik alone; for, we see that, using that opportunity, he has stood
here for thousands of years now, in order to redeem us all, dull creatures as we are. In the same way, even though
the immediate occasion for the Gita's compassion was Arjuna, it is really intended for all of us. Therefore, general
title like "vishada yoga," "The yoga of despondency", seems preferable for the First Chapter.
The tree of the Gita springs as a sprout of the yoga of despondency and, after manifold growth, bears in the final
chapter the fruit of "prasada yoga," "the yoga of grace." If God wills it, we too, shall reach that stage during the
term of our imprisonment.
2. The Gita begins its teaching in the Second Chapter; and even at the very beginning, the Lord tells us the great
truths of life. In doing so, his idea is that once the foundations of the edifice, the basic principles of life, are well
laid, raising the superstructure becomes easy. I interpret the term "sankhya buddhi" in the Second Chapter as the
basic principles of life. We should now see what these fundamental principles are.
But before we do so, while discussing the word "sankhya," it would be useful if we clarify to ourselves the meanings
of the technical words in the Gita.
The Gita has a way of using old philosophical terms in new senses. The evolution of thought takes place by the nonviolent process of grafting new meanings on to old words.
Vyasa is a good hand at this. That is why the words of the Gita have gained a wider meaning; they have remained so
fresh and green that thinkers could discover in them different meanings according to their own needs and
experience. All those interpretations are possible, each from its own point of view, and as I understand it, we can
interpret the Gita for ourselves without having to contradict any of them.
3. There is a beautiful story in the Upanishads which is relevant here. Once the devas (bright gods), the danavas
(dark gods) and the men, all went to Prajapati (the Creator) for advice, Prajapati gave all three of them the same
word of advice, the one syllable "da". The bright gods said, "We devas are self-indulgent; the taste for sensual
pleasures has taken hold for us.
So Brahma, by the sound 'da' has told us to acquire 'damana' (self-control)." The dark gods said, "We danavas are
now very prone to anger, and hard-hearted; the Creator has advised us, by the sound 'da', to cultivate 'daya'
(compassion)." The men said, "We men are given to greed, and have become mad after piling up wealth; by saying
'da' Prajapati has advised us to practice 'dana' (giving of gifts).
" The Creator approved of all their interpretations, because they had arrived at their meaning in terms of the Gita.
We should bear in mind this story from the Upanishads.
The purpose of life: using the body for Svadharma

4. In the Second Chapter, three great truths are declared. First, that the spirit is deathless and indivisible.
Secondly, that the body is transient. Thirdly, that svadharma cannot be thrust aside. Of these, svadharma is in the
nature of a duty to be performed; the other two have to be known and realized. In the First Chapter, I have
already said something about svadharma. This svadharma comes to one naturally. One does not have to go out in
search of one's own dharma. It is not as if we have dropped down from the sky and started walking on the earth.
Before we were born, our society existed, our parents existed, our neighbors existed. We are born into this
stream of existence. To serve the parents who gave me life becomes my duty from birth; so too, the duty of
serving the society into which I am born. The truth is that, as we are born our svadharma is also born with us. But
we can also say that it is there waiting for us even before we are born; for it is the purpose of our being born. We
are born to fulfill it. Some people say that svadharma is like one's wife; just as the marriage-bond is considered
indissoluble, the bond of svadharma also cannot be broken.
But even this comparison does not seem to me to go to the heart of the matter; it is only the second best. I would
compare svadharma to one's mother. It was not left to me to choose my mother in this birth. It had already been
determined for me. No matter what sort of person she is, there is no pushing her away. That is precisely the case
with svadharma - it is inescapable. Besides svadharma, we have nothing else in all this world to rely on, to rest in.
To disown one's svadharma is to disown oneself, to commit suicide. Only with its help can we move forward. That is
why no one should ever let go his hold on svadharma. The basic truth has been firmly established.
5. Our svadharma comes to us with such ease and naturalness that we should cherish it without effort. But
because of many kinds of illusion, this does not happen; or else, it is performed with great difficulty; or even if it is
practiced, it gets corrupted with many sorts of faults. There are many external forms assumed by the illusion
which strews with thorns the path of svadharma. Yet, if we examine them, only one thing is at the bottom of it all,
namely, a restricted and shallow identification of oneself with the body.
Myself, and those related to me through the body, set the limits of my expansion. Anyone outside this circle is to
me a stranger or an enemy. This identification with the body builds a wall around me and cuts me off; and the odd
thing about it is that I regard only the bodies as "me" and "mine". Falling into this double trap of identification of
oneself and one's people with the body we start putting up all sorts of little walls. Almost everybody is busy doing
this. Of these enclosures, one man's is larger, and another's smaller, but after all, every one of them is a wall. And
it is no thicker than his skin.
One man puts up an enclosure called "attachment to family" and lives in it; another builds and lives in an enclosure
called "attachment to nation." One wall divides Brahmans and Non-brahmans, another divides Hindus and Muslims.
In this way, not one or two, but many such walls have been built. Wherever you turn, you see nothing but walls. Even
inside this jail of ours, we have political and non-political prisoners, as if we could not live without these walls within
walls. But what is the result of this? Only one thing : the germs of base thoughts multiply, and the health which is
svadharma is destroyed.
The purpose of life: Awareness of the Self that transcends the body.
6. In this situation, it is not enough to perform one's svadharma with determination. Something more is required;
It is necessary to be awake to two other principles also. One is : "I am not this mortal body; the body is only the
outer covering." The other is : "I am the spirit that never dies, that cannot be cut up, that pervades everything."
When these two principles are combined, one attains the perfect truth.
The Gita considers a knowledge of this truth so essential that it invokes this truth first, and brings in svadharma
only later. Some people wonder why these verses about the ultimate truth occur in the very beginning. But to me it
seems that if there are any verses at all in the Gita whose position can never be changed, it is these. If this much
knowledge is stamped on our mind, then svadharma will not seem hard to us. Not only that, but anything not
svadharma will seem hard. It is not at all difficult to realize the indestructibility of spirit and the transience of
the body, because both these are true and real.

But then, we have to reflect upon them. We should turn them round and round in our minds. We should train
ourselves to belittle the flesh and exalt the spirit.
7. Look, this body changes every instant. Who is not caught in the cycle of childhood, youth and old age? Modern
scientists say that in seven years the whole body changes, and that not even a drop of the old blood remains. Our
ancestors believed that the old body dies in twelve years. That is why they fixed the period for penance
(prayaschitta), austerity (tapascharya) or study (adhyayana) as twelve years. We hear stories of how a son meets
his mother after many years of separation, and the mother cannot recognize him.
This body that changes every moment, dies every moment, is this your true form? Night and day, the sewers of
your body keep flowing, and even in spite of your indefatigable scavenging it never gives up its uncleanliness; is this
body you? It is unclean; it is you who wash it. It is sickly; it is you that treat it with medicine and water. It fills
three and a half cubits of space: you sport in the three worlds.
It is liable to endless changes; you witness these changes. It is liable to death; and you ordain it. When the
distinction between it and you is so clear, why do you shrink into such smallness? Why do you say that only that
which is related to your body belongs to you? And why grieve so much for the death of the body? The Lord asks,
"My friend, is the destruction of the body a cause for grief?"
8. The body is like one's clothes. When the old clothes wear out, we go in for new ones. If one body were to stick
for ever to the soul, the soul would be in a sad plight; it would stop growing, its joy would vanish, and the light of its
knowledge would become dim. That is why the destruction of the body cannot be something to grieve over. Yes, if
the soul could be destroyed that certainly would be something to grieve over. But the spirit is indestructible: it is
an unbroken, ever-flowing stream.
Many bodies settle on it for a while and then disappear. That is why it is all wrong to get caught in the circle of
body's relations and to suffer with divisions and distinctions, saying, "These belong to me; those belong to others."
Look, this whole universe is like a lovely shawl; and a little boy takes a pair of scissors and cuts it up into pieces.
What a childish and violent folly to use the body as a pair of scissors with which to cut up the universal spirit!
Really, it is a matter for great sorrow, that in India, where knowledge of the eternal reality (brahma-vidya) was
born, we can now see so many parties big and small, besides factions and castes, on every side.
And in our hearts lurks so much fear of death that one wonders whether there is any other place like this where
people once conquered death but are now afraid of it. There is no doubt that this is a result of long subjection, but
one should not forget that it is also a cause of that subjection.
9. Even the word "death" we cannot bear to hear. To mention death seems inauspicious to us. Jnanadev had to say
with great sorrow : "The word they death cannot bear; they weep when someone dies." And if someone dies, what
lamentation, what loud outcry! Why, we think all this is a duty! We even go further and hire professional mourners
to do the weeping for us. Even when death approaches, we do not tell the patient of it. Even if the physician has
told us that the patient cannot live, we would still keep him in the dark about it. The doctor himself does not speak
plainly; he empties bottles of medicine into him so long as there is breath in the body.
If instead he were to tell the truth give him the comfort of courage, and direct his thoughts towards God, what a
real help it would be! But their fear is that under the shock this brittle pot might crack before its time. But really,
could this pot crack before the ordained moment? And besides, if this pot that was due to crack two hours hence
should crack right now, what difference does it make? All this does not mean that one should become hard-hearted
or loveless. But attachment to the body is not love. On the contrary, unless attachment to the body is put away,
true love does not emerge.
When attachment to the body goes, then one realizes that the body is an instrument for service; and then the
body also finds its real support and receives the honor due to it. But today we regard pampering the body as the
sole purpose of our lives. We have forgotten that life is to be lived for the fulfillment of svadharma. One has to
foster and cherish the body because only so can one perform one's svadharma. The need is not just to satisfy the

cravings of the palate. It is all the same to the spoon whether you serve sweets with it, or rice and curry. It
doesn't feel pleased in the one case or dissatisfied in the other.
The tongue too should be in the same happy position - it should, of course, have taste, but no pleasure or pain from
it. The body is to be paid its due hire - no more than that. We have to use the charkha (spinning wheel) for
spinning, so it is necessary to oil it. In the same way, we get work out of the body, and we have to give it fuel. If we
were to use it in this way, the body, though it is nothing in itself, can gain value and find its roots in the spirit.
10. But instead of using the body as an instrument, we lose ourselves in it, and stunt our spirit. Thus the body,
which already was of little intrinsic value, becomes even more worthless. That is why the saints say firmly, "It is
wrong to be attached to the body and those related through the body; dogs and pigs too are worthy of affection.
This body and those related to you through this body - do not worship these alone, day and night, my friend. Learn
to recognize others too as belonging to you." The saints teach us thus to grow.
Do we ever take anything of ourselves to anyone not a close relation or friend? Do we ever take anything of
ourselves to anyone not a close relation or friend? Do we ever do anything "to mingle soul with soul, to make self
meet self?" Do we let the swan of the spirit go outside this cage and breathe free air? Does it ever occur to you to
break through your accepted circle and say to yourself, "I will make ten new friends tomorrow?" Making fifteen
friends today and fifty tomorrow, shall I one day feel that the whole world belongs to me, and I to the world? We
write letters to our relations from the jail; what is there so wonderful about that? But would we write to a new
friend released from prison - not a political prisoner, but a thief?
11. The self is impatient to pervade the world. It wants to encompass all creation. But we shut it up in a cell. We
have made a prisoner of it. We are not conscious of it. From morning till evening we are busy minding the body. Day
and night we worry about how fat or how thin our bodies have become. One would think that there was no other joy
in the world. Even beasts experience the pleasures of sense. Will you not now taste the joy of giving away and of
controlling the palate? What joy there is in giving away your full plate of food to a hungry man, though you too
suffer from hunger! Taste the joy of this experience.
The mother, when she works hard for the sake of her child, knows something of this joy. Even when a man draws a
small circle and calls it "his own," the unconscious aim is to taste the joy of growth in the self, for there by, the
self bond in the body comes out for a little while. But what sort of release is this? It is like the prisoner coming
out of his cell into the courtyard. But this is not enough for the spirit. The spirit wants the joy of unbounded
freedom.
12. The essence of the matter is :- (1) The seeker after perfection (sadhaka) needs to leave the crooked ways of
adharma (what is not one's dharma) and paradharma (someone else's dharma) and take the natural easy path of
svadharma. He should never let go the motherly security of svadharma.
(2) The body perishes every moment; understanding this, let him use it for the sake of svadharma. When there is
need, let him not hesitate even to give it up for the sake of svadharma.
(3) Let him be constantly aware that the self is indestructible, all pervasive; and let him remove from his heart the
distinction of "mine" and "thine". The Lord tell us these basic principles of living. The man who treads the path
shown by the Lord will one day, without doubt, experience "through this human body itself the blissful state of
existence-consciousness-bliss."
13. The Lord has indeed told us the truths of life, but the work is not complete with mere telling. These principles
enunciated in the Gita are found already in the Upanishads and Smritis. If the Gita merely repeated them, it would
be no great distinction. Its real merit is in that it tells us how to bring these truths into practice. It is in solving
this great problem that the skill of the Gita lies.
"Yoga" is the name of the art or process by which these principles can be put into practice in the actual living.
The word "sankhya" means principles or theory. "Yoga" means art. Jnanadev bears witness: "The art of living comes
of itself to Yogis." The Gita is full of both sankhya and Yoga, science and art, shaastra and kalaa. When science and

art meet, life blossoms into beauty. Mere science is a castle in the air. One may understand the theory of music,
but if one has not trained the voice and mastered the art of singing, then nada-brahma (God as sound) would not
take shape for us. That is the reason why the Lord has taught not only the principles, but also the art of applying
them. What then in this art? What is the art which enables one to realize the transience of the body and the
indestructibility and wholeness of the spirit, and so to practice svadharma?
Behind a man's action there are generally two types of attitude. One is the assured feeling, "I shall enjoy the fruit
of my action. I have a right to it." On the contrary, there is feeling, "If I am not to enjoy the fruit of my action,
then I will not act at all." The Gita tells us of yet another attitude of mind or way of life, which says, "You must of
course act, but don't think that you have a right to the fruit." The man who acts has no doubt a right to the fruit.
But give up this right of your own free will. Rajas says, "If I accept the work, I demand the fruit." Tamas says, "If
I give up the fruit, I shall give up the work also." These two attitudes are like two brothers. Therefore, leave both
behind and reach pure Sattvaguna. In other words, do the work, but give up the fruit; and giving up the fruit, do
the work. Before, or after, do not hanker after the fruit.
14. "Don't hanker after the fruit," says the Gita. But it also insists that you should act with full energy and skill.
The action of the person who acts without desire should be much better than that of the person who acts with
desire. The later is attracted to the fruit, and a part, much or little, of his time and attention will, of course, be
spent on thought and dreams of the fruit. But all the time and all the strength of the man who has no desire for
the fruit is devoted to the action. The river takes no rest, the wind knows no fatigue, and the sun can only shine
and shine forever. The disinterested doer, too, cannot but render unremitting service.
What action then can equal that of the man who thus always rejoices in action? Also, balance of mind is itself a
noble quality, and this, one might say, comes to the disinterested doer in his own right. If, in a work of art, besides
dexterity and skill of hand, there is also mental poise, we see in it a greater beauty expressed.
Moreover, the difference between the outlook of the disinterested worker and the worker with attachment is all
to the advantage of the former. The man of desires looks at an act with the eye of self-interest: "The act is mine,
and the fruit too is mine.
" Because of this, it does not appear to him a moral lapse if his attention strays a little from the work. At most, it
seems to him an error in execution. But the worker without desire for the fruit feels in relation to his work a sense
of moral duty. So with concentration, he takes care that there is no shortcoming in his work. His work is more
flawless. However you look at it, renunciation of fruit is the most effective and noble principle. And so, we may say
that renunciation of fruit is yaga, the art of living.
15. Leaving aside the matter of desireless action, there is in the action itself a joy which you cannot find in the
fruit. While performing an action for its own sake, one's absorption in it is itself a stream of joy. If you said to an
artist. "Don't paint pictures; I shall pay you for not painting," he would not agree. If you said to the farmer, "Don't
go out into the fields, or graze your cattle, or lift water from your wells; we will give you as much grain as you ask
for," if he were a true farmer, he wouldn't like this arrangement. The farmer goes into his fields early in the
morning. Suryanarayana (God as the sun) welcomes him.
The birds sing for him. The cattle crowd around him. He strokes their backs with affection. He looks with loving
eyes on the plants and trees that he has raised. There is a pure, a sattvik joy in these actions. And this joy itself is
the foremost, the real fruit of action. Weighed against this, the outer, the material fruit is quite secondary.
By taking man's attention away from the fruit, the Gita multiplies a hundredfold his concentration on his work. The
disinterested worker's concentration on his work is itself a kind of samadhi (an experience of oneness). It follows
that his joy is many times greater than that of others. If we look at it this way, it becomes at once clear that
desireless action is itself a great reward.
Does not Jnanadev ask, "The tree yields fruit. Would you have the fruit yield further fruit?" When this body, like
a tree, has brought the beautiful fruit of disinterested pursuit of svadharma, why look for any other fruit? Why
should the farmer who has sown wheat, sell it and eat bread of millets? Why grow bananas and, selling the fruit,
buy chilies instead? Eat what you sow, my brother. But the world does not accept all this. Though they have the
good fortune to be able to live on bananas, they relish chilies. The Gita says, "Don't do this; but eat action itself,
drink action itself, digest action itself." Everything else comes with the performance of action. A child plays for

the joy of playing. The benefit of exercise comes of its own accord. But the child does not think of this benefit. All
his joy is in the playing.
Renunciation of fruit: Two examples
16. This joy in action, saints have illustrated in their lives. Shivaji, the king, had great regard for Saint Tukaram.
Once he sent a palanquin to fetch Tukaram and made arrangements to receive him with honor. But Tukaram was
deeply distressed by these preparations. He thought to himself, "Is this the reward for my devotion? Is it for this
that I worship God?" It seemed to him as if the Lord, by placing this fruit for worldly honor in his hands, was
pushing him away. He said:
"You know my heart; do you wish to get rid of this trouble from me? Wicked is this trick of yours, Pandurang!"
"My Lord, this plan of yours is far from good. You are trying to put me away with a little red bead. You perhaps
think you can get rid of the bother in this way. But after all, I am not the disciple of such a poor teacher. I shall
cling to your feet and let go. Devotion is the svadharma of the devotee; and the art of his life is to see that the
tree of devotion does not put forth branches bearing other fruit."

17. The life of Pundalik shows us an even more profound ideal of renunciation. Pundalik looked after his parents and
served them. Being pleased with such service, the Lord Pandurang came running to greet him. But Pundalik would
not be beguiled by Pandurang, and refused to give up his duty of service. Serving his father and mother was for
him worship of God, true bhakti. If a boy were to rob others and cherish his parents or a patriot to be treacherous
to other nations in his country's interests, the devotion of either could not be called bhakti.

It would be mere attachment. Pundalik was not caught up in any such attachment to a form. He thought to himself:
"This form that God has taken when he stands before me, is God only this? Was creation a corpse before He
appeared in this form?" He said to God, "Lord, you have come yourself to bless me with this vision. This I
understand. But I believe in the doctrine of 'AND ALSO'. I cannot accept that you alone are God. To me, you are
God, AND my parents too are God.
Since I am engaged in their service, I am unable to give you my attention. Please forgive me." So he pushed towards
the Lord a brick for him to stand on, and became absorbed again in his service to his parents. Tukaram has taken up
this occasion and with great enthusiasm and wonder.
"What mad love is this, that kept Vitthal waiting.
What brave folly to push a brick for Him to stand on!"
18. This doctrine of "AND" which Pundalik applied is part of the technique used for renunciation of fruit. If the
absorption in work (karma-samadhi) of the man who has renounced the fruit of action is deep, his outlook on life
(vritti) is broad, inclusive and balanced. For this reason, he never falls into the tangle of conflicting philosophies,
nor does he let go his own principle. He does not raise controversies like those the Gita talks of "Naanyada-stiiti
vaadinah" - "Those who say that nothing else is," and "Only this exists - there is no other." On the other hand, his
humble but firm attitude is "This is true, AND that too is true. But for me, this is true."
Once a householder went to a sadhu and asked him, "In order to attain freedom (moksha), is it necessary to
renounce the home?" The sadhu said, "Surely not. Look since men like Janaka have lived in palaces and found
salvation (moksha), where is the need for you to leave the home?" Later, another man came and asked the sadhu,
"Swamiji, can one attain moksha without leaving the home?" Now the sadhu replied, "Whoever said so? If one could
stay at home and get moksha, were Suka and others, then, fools to renounce their homes?" When later these two
men met, a loud dispute arose.
One asserted, "The sadhu (ascetic) says we must renounce our homes." The other protested, "No, he says that it
is unnecessary. "Then both came to the sadhu, who said, "You are both right. The way is in accord with the attitude

of mind; the answer follows the question. One should leave one's home; one need not leave one's home - both are
true." This is the doctrine of "AND ALSO."
19. From the example of Pundalik one can understand how far the renunciation of fruit can take one. The
temptation before Pundalik (the vision of the Lord) was much more subtle than the material temptation offered to
Tukaram. But he was not taken in even by that. If he had been, he would have been lost. So then, once one's way
has been chosen, it should be pursued to the end, even if the vision of the Lord crosses the path. The body exists
for the fulfillment of a purpose. The vision of God is always in our grasp; how could it escape us?
"When my heart is steeped in the love of you, who now can take away from me the sense of oneness with all?"
It is to attain such love (bhakti) that one is born. When the Gita says, "maate sango astu akarmani." (Do not be
attached to inaction), the meaning of this, extends thus far, that while you act you must not retain even the vasana
(desire) of moksha, the attachment of liberation or ultimate freedom from action. Freedom from moksha is itself
moksha. What track can moksha have with vasana? When renunciation of fruit reaches this point, then the art of
life has attained completeness and perfection, and shines like the full moon.
The Ideal Teacher
20. The shaastra and the kalaa, the science and the art, have both been expounded - but even after this, the whole
picture does not stand clearly before our eyes. Science is absolute and unqualified, art has quality; shaastra is
nirguna, kalaa is saguna. But even a quality does not manifest itself to the eye, unless it assumes a form. The
saguna, if it is not given a form, may be as elusive as the absolute. The way out of this difficulty is to behold the
man in whom the quality has taken shape. This is why Arjuna says, "Lord, you have taught me the most important
truth of life, and the art by which these can be bought into practice.
But the picture is not yet clear. I wish you to illustrate them by citing an example? Tell me the marks by which one
can know the man whose mind holds fast to these principles, and whose every pulse spells out the yoga of
renunciation. Tell me about him whom we call the sthitaprajna (the man of steadfast wisdom), who shows us the
profound depths of renunciation, who is absorbed in oneness with action (karma-samadhi) who is as firm as the
great Mount Meru. How does he speak, how does he sit, how does he walk? What does he look like, how can one
recognize him? Will you not tell me all this, my Lord?"
21. It is in answer to this entreaty that at the end of the Second Chapter, the Lord has drawn for us in eighteen
slokas (verses) the heroic and sublime character of the sthitaprajna. In these eighteen slokas he has distilled the
essence of the eighteen chapters of the Gita.
The sthitaprajna is the ideal character of the Gita. Even the phrase, sthitaprajna is the ideal character of the
Gita. Even the phrase, sthitaprajna is the Gita's own. Later, the Gita describes other figures in the same way - the
jivan-mukta (the liberated one) in the Fifth chapter, the bhakta (the devotee) in the Twelfth, the gunatita (one
who has transcended all attributes) in the Fourteenth, the jnananishstha (one steadfast in knowledge) in the
Eighteenth. But this description of the sthitaprajna is more detailed and revealing than that of the others. Here,
side by side with the characteristics of the siddha the perfect one, we are also told of the qualities of the
sadhaka, the seeker after perfection.
Thousands of satyagrahis, men and women, recount these qualities in their evening prayers. If they could reach
every village and every house, what a happy thing it would be! But assuredly, if they dwell in our hearts they would,
of their own accord, spread outwards. If what we recite every day, becomes mechanical repetition, then instead of
impressing itself on the mind, it will fade out. This, however, is not the fault of constant repetition, constant
meditation and self-examination are necessary.
22. The sthitaprajna is the man of steadfast mind - the very name proclaims it. But how can the mind be steadfast
without self-control? So the sthitaprajna is said to be the embodiment of self-control. The mind being fixed in the
self (atman) and controlling the indriyas (the organs of perception and action) - this is self control. The
sthitaprajna reins in the indriyas and guides them into karma-yoga, the way of action. To vary the image, using his

indriyas as oxen, he ploughs well and cultivates the field of the disinterested performance of svadharma. Every
breath of his is used in this higher pursuit.
23. This control of the indriyas is not easy. Perhaps, in a way, it might be easy not to use one's indriyas at all.
Silence and fasting are not so difficult. The opposite, to leave one's indriyas free, of course, comes easy to
everybody. But to do as the tortoise does, drawing in its limbs in times of danger, and using them when it is safe, to
draw the senses away from objects, and to use them aright from higher services - this discipline is difficult. For
this, great effort and much wisdom are needed. Even with all this, it is doubtful whether we shall reach the goal.
Are we then to despair? No, the sadhak (the seeker after perfection) should never lose hope. If, after trying all
the techniques of his sadhana, discipline, something is still lacking then let him call in faith, bhakti. The Lord has
given us this very valuable advice in the course of his picture of the sthitaprajna.
Yes, he has given it in a few words. But these few words are more valuable than cartloads of explanation, for

bhakti has been brought in when the need for it is greatest. We shall not here go into the qualities of the
sthitaprajna in detail. But I draw attention to it now, lest we should forget the essential place assigned to bhakti in
all our sadhana. Only God knows who in this world is a perfect sthitaprajna; but the figure of Pundalik always comes
before my eyes as the example of the sthitaprajna who is utterly given over to service - and that I have placed
before you.
24. Well, now the qualities of the sthitaprajna are complete, and the Second Chapter is over.

Nirguna

+ Saguna + The embodiment

(Theory) (Art and Practice) (The Steadfast seer)

(Sankhyabuddhi) (Yogabuddhi) (Sthitaprajna)
|
|
|
|
|
|
---------------------------------|
together
complete the science
of life
What other fruit but brahma-nirvan, Liberation, can this tree yield?
THE YOGA OF ACTION The infinite gains of renunciation of fruit
1. Brothers, in the Second Chapter, we glanced over the whole of the philosophy of life. Now, in the Third Chapter,
we shall explain this philosophy more clearly. We began by considering principles; now we shall go into detail. In the
previous Chapter we discussed karma-yoga (the way of action). The great thing in karma-yoga is giving up the fruit
of one's actions.
Yes, in karma-yoga one surrenders the fruit; but the question arises : does the fruit come to one, nevertheless, or
does it not? Thus the Third Chapter says that the karma-yogi, by giving up the fruit of his action, does not lose it,
but paradoxically enough gains it in infinite measure. Here one is reminded of the story of Lakshmi (the goddess of
prosperity). It was her svayamvara (the day when she was to choose her husband). All the gods and titans had
comes with hopes raised high; Lakshmi had not proclaimed her vow before.
She came into the assembly and said "I shall garland only the man who has no desire for me." But then, they were
all covetous of her. So Lakshmi began to search for the desire less one whom she could choose. Now there
appeared before her the form of Lord Vishnu lying peacefully on the serpent, Shesha. She put the wedding garland
round His neck and to this day she sits there, stroking His feet. Ramaa (the goddess of beauty) becomes the slave
of him who does not hanker after her. That is the wonder of it.
2. The ordinary man puts up a bristling hedge around his fruits; but by doing so, he loses the infinite fruit that
should have been his. The worldly man, after endless toil receives a small reward; but the karma-yogi, though he

may do little, receives immense benefit. The difference is due only to a bhavana (an inward attitude). Tolstoy says
somewhere: People talk a lot about the sacrifice of Jesus Christ; but no one knows how much the worldly man runs
about every day of his life and grows dry within! He carries on his back the burden of two donkeys and capers
about. Is not his suffering much greater, his plight far worse, than Jesus Christ's?
3. The worldly people also put in arduous labor; but it is in pursuit of low aims. We reap what we sow; as is the
desire, so is the fruit. The world will not pay more for our wares than the price we ourselves mark on them. Sudama
went to the Lord Krishna with a gift of flattened rice. The handful of rice may not be worth even a pie, but to
Sudama it seemed invaluable, for his devotion went with it. It was charmed rice. Every grain of it was charged with
his love. However cheap a thing may be, the mantra, the charm (words charged with power), increases its value, its
power.
What after all is the weight of a currency note? If we burn it, we might perhaps, be able to warm a drop of water.
But the stamp on it gives its value. This is the whole beauty of karma-yoga also. Action is like the currency note.
Its value is that of the bhavana (the feeling behind it), the stamp it bears, not that of the karma or outward
action, the piece of paper.
In a way, what I am telling you is the secret of image-worship itself. There is great beauty in the idea of
worshipping an image. Who can break this image? The image in the beginning, was merely a piece of stone. I put life
into it. I filled it with my bhavana, my feeling. How can anyone destroy my feeling? Stones can be smashed, but not
feeling. When I withdraw my feelings from the image, then what remains will be mere stone, a thing which anyone
can break to pieces.
4. In other words, then, action is a piece of stone, or a piece of paper. My mother scribbled three or four lines on a
piece of paper and sent it off to me; another gentleman sent me a long discursive fifty-page letter. Now, which is
more weighty? But the feeling in my mother's few lines is beyond measure; it is sacred. The other stuff cannot
stand comparison with it. Action must be moistened with love, filled with feeling (bhavana). We set a price on
laborer's work, and pay him his due wages.
But a ritual gift (dakshina) is not given like that. One sprinkles water on the dakshina, before giving it away. Here,
one does not ask how much is given. The important question is whether it was moistened or not, - whether there
was love in it or not. There is an entertaining passage in the Manusmriti, Code of Manu, the law-giver. A student
lived twelve years in his Master's house. He went there as animal, and came out a man.
Now what fee was he to give his Master? In olden days, the fees were not collected in advance. After studying for
twelve years, one gave the teacher what was proper. Manu says, "Give the master one or two leaves and flowers, a
fan or a pair of sandals, or a water-pot." Don't think this is a joke; for whatever is to be given, should be given with
the knowledge that it is a symbol of faith. What, after all, is the weight of a flower? But in the eyes of devotion, it
is equal to all creation.
"With a single leaf of tulasi, Rukmini weighed Giridhar, the Lord who lifted up a mountain." Satyabhama's
ponderous jewelry was of no avail. But when mother Rukmini laid a tulasi leaf, filled with devotion, on the scale, the
thing was done. The tulasi leaf was charged with magic. It was no longer a common leaf. This is true of the action
of the karma-yogi too.
5. Suppose two men go for a bath in the Ganga. One of them says, "What is this Ganga that people talk so much
about? Take two parts of hydrogen and one of oxygen; combine the two gases - it becomes Ganga. What else is
there in the Ganga?" The other says, "The Ganga flows from the lovely lotus feet of Lord Vishnu. She has dwelt in
the matted hair of Shiva. Thousands of seers, both ascetic and kingly, have done penance near her; countless holy
acts have been performed by her side. Such is the sacred Ganga, my mother."
Filled with this bhavana (feeling), he bathes in the river. The other man, regarding it as combination of hydrogen
and oxygen also bathes. Both derive the benefit of physical cleansing. But the devotee (bhakta) gets the benefit of
physical purification as well. Even a buffalo, if it bathes in the Ganga, will achieve physical cleanliness. The dirt of

the body will go. But how to wash the mind of its taint? One got the petty benefit of physical cleanliness; the
other, in addition, gained the invaluable fruit of inward purity.
When, after bathing a man performs Suryanamaskar (a strenuous form of Sun worship), he will, of course, get the
benefit of physical exercise. It is not for the sake of bodily health that he performs Suryanamaskar, but he does
it as worship (upasana). Of course, he gains good health, but the brightness of his intellect also increases. While he
grows healthier, God as the Sun (Suryanarayana) also grants him greater awareness and imaginative power.
6. The action is the same; but a distinction arises from the difference in bhavana (in the inward attitude). The
action of the man who seeks spiritual good promotes the growth of the soul; the action of the worldly man serves
to bind it. If the karma-yogi is a farmer, he will till the land, considering it his svadharma. His stomach will, of
course, be filled; but he does not work for filling his stomach. He looks upon food as a means by which he keeps his
body fit for the task of tilling the land.
The end is svadharma and food is the means. But to the farmer who is not a karma-yogi, filling his stomach is the
end, and his svadharma, farming, is the means. The two attitudes are thus reverse to each other. In describing the
qualities of the sthitaprajna (the steadfast seer) in the Second Chapter, this distinction has been brought out in a
striking way. When others are awake, the karma-yogi is asleep; and when others asleep, the karma-yogi is awake.
Just as we take good care to keep our stomach filled, the karma-yogi is watchful lest even the moment should slip
past without action. If he too eats, it is out of necessity. Because there is no help for it, he puts food into his
stomach. The worldly man finds joy in eating; the yogi finds it a hardship. So he does not enjoy as he tastes it. He
eats with self-restraint. The night of the one is the day of the other; and the day of the one is the night of the
other. In other words, in what one finds joy, the other finds pain and vice-versa.
Though the actions of the worldly man and the karma-yogi look alike, the karma-yogi's distinction is that he has
given up attachment to the fruit of his action, and finds joy in the action itself. The yogi, like the worldly man,
eats, drinks, sleeps. But his bhavana, his attitude to these actions, is different. That is why, though there are
sixteen chapters of the Gita left, still, at the very beginning, the figure of the steadfast seer, the sthitaprajna,
the embodiment of self-control is placed before us.
The similarity and the difference between the action of the worldly man and those of the karma-yogi are
immediately apparent. Suppose the karma-yogi is engaged in the care of cows. With what outlook does he do it? His
bhavana (attitude) is that, by his service to the cows, society will get its fill of milk; and that, through the cow, he
will forge for himself a link of love with the lower orders of creation. He does not do it for his wages, the wages
come to him all right; but the real joy and pleasure are in this pure bhavana, this spiritual outlook.
7. The karma-yogi's action unites him with all creation. If we will not eat without first watering the tulasi plant, we
create, by this resolve, a bond of love between ourselves and the vegetable kingdom. How can I eat, while leaving
the tulasi hungry? Learning in this way to identify ourselves with the cow and the tulasi, we must attain oneness
with the whole universe. In the Mahabharata war, everybody, at sunset, leaves the field for evening prayer, but
Lord Krishna unyokes the horses from the chariot, gives them water, rubs them down, removes the burrs from
their bodies.
What a joy the Lord finds in this service! In describing this, the poet knows no weariness. Picture it to yourself.
The Lord Parthasarathi (the Lord as Arjuna's charioteer) feeds the horses from his yellow silk (Pitambar), which
he has filled with gram. And thus you will experience in imagination the joy of karma-yoga. Take it that every act is
a noble, spiritual, consecrated act. Take Khadi-work itself. Does the man who hawks Khadi in the streets, with a
bundle on his back, never get tired?
No, because he is absorbed in the thought that he has to feed the millions of his brothers and sisters in this
country who are naked and starving. This selling of a yard of Khadi makes him one with Daridranarayana (God in the
form of the poor).

Varied benefits of Karma-yoga
8. In the yoga of desire less action, there is a miraculous power. By such action, both the individual and society are
richly blessed. The life of the man who follows his svadharma runs the even tenor of its course. But, because he is
always absorbed in action, his body keeps pure and healthy. And, as a result of his action, the society in which he
lives prospers too. The karma-yogi farmer will not cultivate opium or tobacco just because it will fetch a lot of
money, for he has related his work to the welfare of society.
Action done as svadharma confers
nothing but benefit on the community. The trader who believes that his business is for the good of the society will
never deal in foreign fineries. His business advances the welfare of the society. The karma-yogi forgets himself
and lives in identity with the community around him. Any society into which such karma-yogi are born will maintain
order; prosperity and goodwill.
9. The result of the karma-yogi's action is that while his life goes on smoothly, his body and mind are radiant; and
society too prospers. Besides these two benefits, he also receives the great gift of chitta-suddhi, purity of mind,
"Purity through action," it is called. Action is a means to inward purity, but not the routine action of everybody.
What brings about inward purity is the "charged" action of the karma-yogi. The Mahabharata tells the story of the
merchant Tuladhar (the balance-holder).
A brahmin called Jajali goes to him to find true knowledge. Tuladhar saves him, "Brother, it is necessary to keep
the beam of this balance always even." By constantly doing this external action, Tuladhar's mind too had become
straight and sensitive. Whether a child comes into the shop, or a grown up person, his beam remains level for all,
leaning neither this way nor that. One's action transforms one's mind.
The karma-yogi's work is a form of prayer (japa). His mind is purified by it, and the clear mind receives the image
of jnana, true knowledge. From the arm of the balance Tuladhar got mental poise. As Sena, the barber, cleaned
other people's heads, wisdom came to him. "Look, I remove the dirt from other's heads, but have I ever removed
the dirt from my own head, from my own mind?" The language of the spirit came to him through his work. As we
weed this field, the karma-yogi gets the idea of removing the weeds of habit and passion from his heart.
Gora the potter kneads and moulds the raw clay and gives baked pots to the people; from this he learns the lesson
that his own life too is a pot that needs to be baked. He can test with his fingers if a pot is baked or raw; he thus
becomes a judge of saintliness. From this it is evident that karma-yogi, through the terms of his own trade or
occupation, gains knowledge of perfection. What was their trade but a school of the spirit? These actions of theirs
were nothing but worship, nothing but service. Viewed from without, these actions looked worldly, but inwardly, in
reality, they were spiritual.
Another great benefit flows from the actions of the karma-yogi: Society has before it an ideal. In a community, it
happens that one man is born before and another after. It becomes the responsibility of the one who was born
earlier to set an example to those who come later. It is the responsibility of the elder brother to the younger
brother, of the parent to the children, of the leader to his followers, of the teacher to his pupils, to set an
example through his actions.
And who but the karma-yogi is unceasingly devoted to his work, for in work only he sees joy. Thus false vanity loses
ground in society. Though the karma-yogi is contended within himself, he cannot live at all without work. Tukaram
says, "What if I have found God by singing his praises, by devotional songs/bhajan? Should I, therefore, give up my
bhajan? After all, bhajan has now become my nature." "Having first kept company of the saints Tuka merged into
Pandurang (God). Even then his devotional songs do not cease. One's nature does not change."
The karma-yogi has climbed up the steps of action and reached the top; but he does not even then lift his foot off
the step. He cannot shake off action. Work has become second nature to his limbs. In this way he continues to
show to society the great use of value and of the steps, - of service through performing svadharma. It is indeed a
great thing to rid society of falsehood. Through hypocrisy and deceit, society decays. If the jnani,
the man of wisdom, were to sit in silence, others too would follow his example and sit with folded hands.

The jnani, ever content, loses himself in inner happiness, and remains quiet; but the other, though inwardly weeping,
becomes inactive. One is at rest because he is happy at heart; the other too is at rest though his mind is shrunken!
This state is terrifying. It encourages vanity and hypocrisy. That is why all the saints, even after reaching the
heights, have, with good reason, held on to the means, the apron strings of action, have kept on performing their
karma till death. The mother delights in her children's games with their dolls.
Though she knows that it is only make-believe, she joins in and creates in the children interest in the game. If she
takes no part, the
children would find no fun in it. If the karma-yogi, because he is contended, gives up action, others, even though
they have the need for it, will also give up action and therefore remain hungry, joyless. Therefore, the karma-yogi,
like the ordinary man, goes on working. He does not think that he is in anyway an exceptional person. He exerts
himself infinitely more than other men.
It is not necessary to put a stamp on any action and mark it as spiritual. There is no need to advertise one's action.
If you are a perfect brahmachari (a seeker of the real), then let our actions show a hundred times more zest than
other men's. Even though you get less food, do much more work, let society get more and more out of you. Let your
brahmacharya be seen in your conduct and dealings, as the fragrance of sandal spreads far and wide. The essence
of the matter is that the karma-yogi, by surrendering the desire of fruit, receives endless rewards.
His life proceeds evenly. He is radiant in body and mind. The society in which he moves is happy. He attains inward
purity and also jnana. And society being rid of hypocrisy and deceit, the ideal of a perfect life comes within our
reach. This, experience proves, is the greatness of karma-yogi.
Obstacles in the course of karma-yoga
11. The karma-yogi does his work much better than others, because work to him is prayer, worship, ritual, work
itself is a mode of worship (puja). I performed puja. After the puja I received the food offered during the
worship, as prasada (a token of grace). But is this the reward, the payment for my puja? If a man performs puja
for the sake of food, he will, of course, get immediately this part of prasada.
But through the act of puja, the karma-yogi seeks to get the reward of the vision of God. He does not estimate his
action so cheap that it can merely fetch him a portion of the food offering. He is not prepared to mark such a low
price on his action. He does not apply such gross measure to his actions. When a man's outlook is gross, the fruit he
receives will also be gross. There is a proverb among farmers - "Sow deep, but sow moist." It is not enough to sow
deep, there must be moisture in the soil too. With both depth and moisture in the soil, the yield will be enormous.
So, the action should be "deep", i.e., well cultivated. And, it should also be moist with the love of God, with a sense
of dedication. The karma-yogi's actions are sown deep and surrendered to God. We have developed some absurd
ideas about the spirit. People imagine that once a man has become spiritual, there is no more need for him to move
hand or foot, or do any work. They say, "What sort of religious man is this, who ploughs the field and weaves
khadi?" But nobody asks how a spiritual man can eat food. The God of the karma-yogi brushes down horses.
At the Pandavas' Rajasuya sacrifice, He clears the leaf-plates after the feast. He goes out into the forest to
graze cows. If the Lord of Dwaraka went back to Gokul again, He would tend cows, playing on His flute. So the
saints have pictured a karma-yogi God who rubs horses down, takes cows out to graze, drives a chariot, cleans
dishes and mops up floors. And they themselves have done the work of a tailor, or a potter, or a weaver, or a
gardener, or a trader, or a barber or a cobbler. Doing these things, they have found themselves and become free.
12. People slip from the religious observance of karma-yoga for two reasons. In this connection, we must remember
the specific nature of our senses. Our senses are caught up in qualities, such as likes and dislikes. For the things we
want, we feel an attachment or fondness, and an aversion for other things. Thus attachment and aversion, desire
and anger gnaw into a man and eat him up.
How noble, how beautiful, how infinitely rewarding karma-yoga is! But desire and anger tie round our necks this
perpetual rattle. "Take this, and leave that", and we trail this behind us day and night. That is why, at the end of

this Chapter, the Lord rings the warning bell, so that we may shake off this encumbrance and save ourselves. That
karma-yogi should become, like the sthitaprajna, an embodiment of self-control.
VIKARMA - THE KEY TO KARMA-YOGA How Vikarma helps Karma
1. In the last Chapter we discussed yoga of the desireless action. If we give up our svadharma (one's own dharma)
and take over another's dharma, it is quite impossible to attain the goal of desirelessness. It is the merchant's
svadharma to sell wholesome and necessary goods. But when he gives up his svadharma and starts selling luxuries
got from across the seven seas, the motive is mercenary.
How then can that action be free from desire? Cherishing one's svadharma is therefore indispensable, if one is to
free one's action from desire. But even the pursuit of svadharma can be full of desire. Let us take even the matter
of non-violence (ahimsa). To the devotee of non-violence, violence is of course, unthinkable. But it is possible to be
non-violent in externals, and yet in fact be filled with violence; for violence is a quality of the mind. It is not as if
by abstaining from violent action outwardly, the mind becomes full of non-violence.
Drawing the sword proclaims the attitude of violence; but it is not true that by dropping the sword a man becomes
non-violent. The practice of svadharma is exactly like this. To be free of desire, it is essential to keep clear of
other's dharma. But this is only the first step towards freedom from desire. With this alone, we have not reached
the goal.
Desirelessness too, is a quality of the mind. As a means of creating this, the pursuit of svadharma is not enough;
other aids are needed. To light a lamp, one needs not only the oil and the wick, but a flame. When the lamp is lit,
the darkness disappears. How is this lamp to be lit? For this, we need to purify the mind. By self examination, we
have to cleanse the mind of its dirt. At the end of the Third Chapter, the Lord gave this important suggestion, and
from it the Forth Chapter takes its origin.
2. In the Gita, the word "karma" (action) is used in the sense of svadharma. Our eating, drinking, sleeping, are all
actions, but it is not these actions that the Gita refers to when it talks of karma. Karma there means the practice
of svadharma. But in order to achieve freedom from desire through the practice of svadharma, something more is
necessary - victory over kama and krodha, craving and anger. As long as the mind is not as pure and peaceful as the
waters of the Ganga, desirelessness will not come to us.
These actions performed to purify the mind, the Gita calls "vikarma." The three words, "karma", "vikarma" and
"akarma", occurring in the Fourth Chapter, are of utmost importance. Karma is the concrete, outward action
performed as svadharma. The participation of the chitta, the mind and heart, in this external act is "vikarma." We
bow our heads to someone, but if, while we are doing this, the heart too does not bow, the external act is
meaningless.
The inner and the outer must become one. I worship the Siva-linga, Symbol of Lord Siva, perform abhisheka
(ceremonial bath), by bathing it in a continuous stream of water. But if, as I do this, the stream of my meditation
too is not unbroken, what is the value of this ritual? Then the Siva-linga is a stone, and I am another. It only means
that two stones confront each other. The yoga of desireless action is achieved only when the outward action is
combined with the purity of the mind within.
3. When we say "desireless action", the word "desireless" is more significant than the word "action", just as in
"non-violent non-co-operation," the adjective "non-violent" is more important than "non-co-operation.". If we leave
out the non-violence and hold on to the non-co-operation, it could become a terrible thing. In the same way, if the
vikarma of the mind does not enter into the performance of svadharma, it would be a mockery.
The people who do social service today are only performing their svadharma. To serve people who are poor or lame,
or are unhappy and in difficulties, and to make them happy, is the dharma that falls to us in the ordinary course.
But we should not therefore conclude that all social workers have become karma-yogis. If the attitude of mind
(bhavana) in social service is not pure, it can become a terrifying thing. All the egotism, the hatred and envy, the

self-seeking and other distortions that we develop in serving our own families - all this we develop in social service
too. We see with our own eyes how this happens in the social service organizations today.
Karma + Vikarma = Akarma
4. The mind must stand united with the action; this application of the mind, the Gita calls "vikarma". There is the
common action which is outwardly one's svadharma, and there is the special inward action. This special action
varies with the needs of each individual mind. Many kinds of vikarma, with typical examples, are given in the Fourth
Chapter. These, the Gita develops from the Sixth Chapter onwards.
Only when we perform this special karma, when we unite the inner process with outward action, does the light of
desirelessness shine in it. When vikarma, the action of the mind and heart, enters into karma the outward action,
desirelessness grows within us, little by little. As the body and the mind are separate, each has its own means of
growth. When they are in harmony the goal is within our reach. Lest the body and the mind should go different
ways, the great moralists have shown a two-fold path - in bhakti-yoga (the way of devotion) they mention austerity
(tapas) without and meditation (japa) within.
When inwardly, the mind does not meditate, outer forms of (tapas) austerity, like fasting, are entirely wasted.
While doing penance, the inward flame, the bhavana should constantly burn and shine. The very meaning of the
word "upa-vasa" (fasting) is 'to dwell close to God.' It is in order that our minds and heart may stay near God that
we have to close the door against the pleasures of the senses. But if we give up the pleasures of the senses and do
not think of God, of what value is the physical act of fasting?
If, instead of thinking of God, we think of things to eat and drink, the fast would be more dangerous than a feast!
There is nothing as terrible as this mental feasting as thinking about pleasures. Tantra must be accompanied by
mantra, action by meditation. Action, as such, has no value, nor mere meditation without action. The hand and the
heart must work together to render true service.
5. If the outward action is not moistened by the heart's affection then the performance of svadharma would
remain barren, it would not bear the flower and the fruit of desirelessness. Suppose we are nursing a sick man. If
in such service to the sick, there is no compassion, it would become dull and disgusting to us, and a burden instead
of a relief to the patient. Moreover, where the heart is not engaged, egoism too would show its head.
We would entertain expectations like this : "I served him today. He should serve me at my need; he should admire
and praise me." Or else, we get fed up and say, "I do so much for him, and yet he keeps complaining." Sick men are
usually peevish - and those who nurse them without the true spirit of service will only be disgusted.
6. When the inner feeling goes with the action, the latter is transformed into something unique. When the flame is
applied to the wick in the oil light is born. When vikarma is applied to karma, desirelessness comes into being.
When a spark touches the gunpowder it explodes. A power is released from the gunpowder. The mere act, the
karma, is like powder, which has to be activated by the fire of feeling, vikarma. The power that karma develops at
the touch of vikarma is indescribable.
A pinch of lifeless powder in one's pocket blows up a whole body when a spark explodes it. In the same way, the
infinite power of the practice of svadharma lies latent. Touch it with vikarma, and see what work it can do! In the
resulting explosion desire and anger are destroyed, and the way made clear for the attainment of supreme wisdom.
7. Action (karma) is thus the wick of the lamp of knowledge (jnana). There is a log of wood lying somewhere, when
you set fire to it; it becomes a mass of glowing embers. What a difference between that wood and this fire? But it
is the wood that has become this fire. When you apply vikarma to karma, the latter begins to acquire divine
radiance. The mother strokes her child's back. A hand moves up and down a back, and no more. But who can
describe the feelings arising in the hearts of the mother and the child from this commonplace action?
But if you frame an equation that if, on a back of such length and such breadth, a hand of such weight and such
softness is moved; so much joy will result, it would be absurdly comic. The action of the moving hand is quite

insignificant - but the mother has poured her heart into it, she has added vikarma to it. It is this that causes the
thrill of joy. There is a situation in Tulasi's Ramayana.
The monkeys were returning from a battle with the demons, with their bodies wounded and bleeding. But when
Rama's loving look rested on them for a moment, all their pain vanished. Now, if someone else had taken a
photograph of Rama's eyes and look at that moment, and carefully opened out his own eyes in the same way, could
this have the same power? The very attempt would be ridiculous.

8. When vikarma is combined with karma, a power is released which results in akarma (inaction in action). The huge
log of wood burns and becomes a handful of ashes, with which we can joyfully smear our bodies. In the same way,
the fire of vikarma reduces karma to the ashes of akarma. What is the relation between the wood and the ash?
"Kah kena sambandhah?" (What is the relation and with what?) They have no common properties, and yet there is
no doubt that the ash came from the wood.
9. Now, what do we mean by saying that, by pouring vikarma into karma, it becomes akarma? We mean that, while
acting, we seem not to act, we do not feel the burden of action. Though we act, we are not the doer. The Gita says,
that though you have slain, you are not the slayer. The mother beats her child: if you try doing the same, the child
will not stand it.
But when the mother beats her child, he still goes back to her and hides his face in her lap - for there is chittasuddhi, purity of heart, behind the mother's outwardly harsh action. Her punishment of the child was
disinterested. It had no selfish motive. By vikarma, by inner purity, karma ceases to be karma. That look of
Rama's, because of inward vikarma, had become a mighty ocean of healing love; but the action cost Rama no effort.
An action performed with pure heart does not attach itself to us. It leaves no residue of sin or virtue, papa or
punya; else, what a heavy pressure of action would our hearts and minds have to bear! If the news gets abroad at 2
o'clock today, that all political prisoners are to be released tomorrow, people gather together from all sides, and
what confusion, what tumult! The problem of morality, the goodness and badness of action, distracts us.
We feel that action crowds in on us from all sides, we feel that it has caught us by the throat. Just as the waves
of the sea dash with force against the land and make channels into it, the complexity of action
(karma) enters the mind and agitates it. The quality of pleasure and pain, sukha and dukha, develops; all peace is
lost. The action takes place, and is over, but its force remains behind. Action corrupts the mind, and destroys
sleep.
But if, with karma we combine vikarma, then, however much work you do; you will not feel its strain. The mind
becomes still steady and radiant, like the pole-star. When you put vikarma into karma, it becomes akarma; it is as if
you wrote karma on a slate, and then rubbed it out.
The art of akarma - learn it from the saints
10. How does karma become akarma - how does action become inactivity, and inactivity become action? From whom
can we learn this art? From the saints, of course. At the end of the Fourth Chapter, the Lord says, "Go to the
saints and learn from them." In describing how karma becomes akarma, the powers of language are exhausted.
To see it fully, we have to sit at the feet of the saints. The Lord is pictured as "santakaram bhujagasayanam" - he
is asleep and at rest on the coiled power of Sesha, the thousand headed serpent. In the same way, the saints,
though engaged in a thousand action, do not allow a ripple to arise in the still waters of their mind. One can never
understand this miracle until one goes to a saint and sees it.
11. Now-a-days books have become very cheap. For an anna or two, one can get books like the Gita and "Manache
Slok" (a Marathi book by Samarth Ramdas). And of gurus there is no lack. Education too is widely spread and costs
little. Universities seem to distribute knowledge in neat little packets. But no one seems to be satisfied with
feeding of this nectar of knowledge. The more one looks at this mountain of books, the more one realizes how

necessary it is to serve the saint. It looks as though wisdom is held fast within the thick binding of these books,
and cannot come out.
On such occasions I am reminded of a Marathi abhang, psalm :"In front of me stand the high mountains of craving and anger : Far, far beyond them is the Infinite. "
Beyond the high mountains of craving and anger dwells the Lord Narayana. In the same way, behind these book
sheaps, the King of Knowledge sits hidden. Though surrounded by libraries and reading rooms, man everywhere still
remains a monkey without culture or knowledge.
Once in a big library in Baroda, a gentleman was taking out a fat volume with pictures in it. He thought it was in
English. I asked him what book it was, and he thrust it forward. I said, "But this is French," and he replied "So it
has turned out to be a French book, has it? So you know French, do you?" Clear Roman letters, fine pictures and a
beautiful binding - isn't this knowledge enough?
12. In English alone tens of thousands of books are published every year. You may take it that this is so in other
languages too. Though knowledge spreads so rapidly, how does man's mind manage to remain still empty? One man
says that human memory is getting weaker; another, that men are losing the power of concentration; still another,
that whatever he reads seems true to him, and he cannot discriminate; yet another declares, "My dear Sir, I have
no time to think."
The Lord Krishna says, "Arjuna, you have been listening to so far too many things, and your mind is dazed. Till it
gets steady, you will not see the way clearly. Stop reading books and listening to people, now take sanctuary with
the saints. There you can read the book of life. There, silent speech clears all your doubts. By going there you will
understand how utterly serene the mind can be while performing continuous service; you will understand how,
though action rages without, the heart can be turned to produce unbroken music.
THE TWO ASPECTS OF AKARMA - YOGA AND SANNYASA Outward action - a mirror of the mind
1. The world's ways are terrible. Samsara, life in the world has been compared to an ocean. In the ocean, wherever
you look, you see nothing but water; samsara too, is like that. It surrounds you on all sides. If one gives up hearth
and home and takes up public service, there too he finds that the same samsara pitches its tent in his mind and
occupies it.
If one goes and sits in a cave, one's palm's width of loin-cloth is the wrap and woof of samsara. The loin-cloth
becomes for him the essence of all possessiveness. Just as a little currency-note holds a thousand rupees, the
little piece of cloth holds boundless attachment. Because one renounces one's family, narrows one's circle, samsara
has not, therefore, relaxed its hold on one; by reducing one's possession, one does not reduce one's
possessiveness.
Whether you say 10/25 or 2/5, it means the same. Whether at home or in the forest attachment is ever with us.
The pressure of samsara is no lighter. If two yogis went and dwelt in the caves of the Himalayas, even there, if one
comes to hear of the other's fame, he burns with envy. Even in the field of public service, one sees the same thing.
2. The universe of samsara pursues us in such a way that, even when we live within the bounds of svadharma, it
never lets us go. Though one has given up all distracting activities and complications, and has retained samsara only
in name, one still remains, filled with possessiveness, mamatva. Samsara, like any rakshasa (demon), can assume a
larger or smaller form. Big or small, a rakshasa is a rakshasa. What is inescapable is the same wherever you are, in
a palace or in a hut. Even if with the hoops of svadharma, you bind the bale of samsara, and keep it of uniform
weight, then too all sorts of troubles arise, and you become disgusted. Even in your svadharma you will get
entangled with persons and institutions, and will exclaim, "How did I get into this mess?" But only then is your mind
tested on the touchstone. Merely by making one's own the practice of svadharma, one does not become unattached
to samsara. Reducing the area of one's activity is not the same as being unattached.

3. How then can we achieve detachment? We should put into the effort the whole of our mind. Without the mind's
help, nothing can succeed. We see how a boy whose parents have sent him to a school hostel where he gets up early
in the morning, drinks no tea and performs suryanamaskar (Sun-worship with its rhythmic exercises), goes back
home and, in few days, reverts to his old habits.
A man is not a lump of clay. If we wish to give a certain shape to his mind, after all, the mind must receive it : if
the mind does not accept it, then we have to admit that all this education from without is useless. So, in the
process of growth, the co-operation of the mind is essential.
4. As a means of growth, external action, the performance of svadharma, and the inward attitude of the mind,
vikarma, both are needed. The external action is, of course, necessary. If you do not act, you cannot test your
mind. In the stillness of early morning, our minds seem perfectly calm - but the moment a child cries, we see what
our peace of mind is really worth. So we achieve little by rejecting action. External actions reveal the real quality
of our minds.
The surface of the water is clear; but throw a stone into it, and at once the mud rises up. Our minds are just like
that. At the bottom of the still lake, there is knee-deep mud. It is only when an object from without touches it
that one can see it. We say in our languages, "Anger has come to a man." Did that anger come from without? No, it
was within - else it could never have shown itself. People say that they prefer colored Khadi to white, because
"colored Khadi doesn't get dirty."
But that too gets dirty; only, dirt does not show on colored Khadi, while it shows up on white. It cries out, "I am
dirty; wash me, please." People do not like Khadi that tells tales. Our karma (action) too, talks. It proclaims that we
are given to anger, or selfishness, or something else. Karma is the mirror which shows us our true form. We should,
therefore, be grateful to karma. Would we smash a mirror because it shows us a dirty, ugly, face? On the contrary,
we should thank it and go and wash our face, and come back and look at ourselves in the mirror.
Similarly, if through karma defects and weaknesses of our mind come out, should we then wish to avoid karma? Will
our minds become pure by our turning away from karma? So let us continue to act, and make progressive efforts to
make the mind pure.
5. A man goes and sits in a cave, cut off from all human contact. He imagines that he has attained perfect calm of
mind. But let hi leave the cave and go out to beg for his food. A mischievous little boy rattles the bolt of a door,
and is absorbed in contemplating the noise it makes, but the yogi cannot bear the music that the innocent child
makes and enjoys. By living in a cave, he has made his mind so weak that he cannot stand the slightest jolt. A little
rattling noise shatters his peace of mind. It is not good that one's mind should be in such a weak state.
6. To sum up, karma is a very useful thing to enable us to understand what our minds are like. When defects come
to light, we can get rid of them. If they are hidden from sight, progress is obstructed and growth comes to an end.
When we act and discover our own defects, we are impelled to employ vikarma to remove them. When this effort
of vikarma goes on day and night within, then we shall learn in due time how, while performing svadharma, one can
remain unattached, and get beyond kama and krodha, (craving and anger), lobha and moha (greed and delusion).
If we endeavor constantly to keep action free of impurity, then later, pure karma will go on of itself. When once
actions do not distort the mind, but take place naturally, one after the other, we do not notice that they have
taken place at all. When karma becomes natural and normal (sahaja), it becomes akarma. As we have seen in the
Fourth Chapter, it is this sahaja karma that we call akarma. How karma is transformed into akarma, and how we can
learn this art at the feet of the saints, this too the Lord has taught at the end of the Fourth Chapter. Words
cannot describe this state of akarma.
The state of akarma
7. To understand the naturalness of action, let us take a familiar example. When a child first learns to walk, how
much effort he has to put into it! But to us it is a delight to watch this game. We say, "Look, baby is beginning to
walk!" But later, walking becomes natural. He walks and he talks. He does not think about it. It is the same with

eating. We celebrate "annaprasan" (a ceremony performed when the child is first given solid food), as if eating is a
great accomplishment.
But, in course of time eating becomes quite natural. How hard it is to learn to swim! At first, we struggle for
breath, but a time comes when we go for a swim to shake off fatigue. Now, swimming is no effort; swimming has
become second nature to the body. Fatigue is a state of mind. When the mind is consciously engaged in the action it
feels tired, but when action becomes natural, it ceases to weigh on us. Karma has become akarma. It is full of joy.
8. Our ideal is to make karmaturn into akarma - to this end, we should perform the karma in accordance with our
svadharma. In doing so, our failings come to light, and to remove these, we should hold on to vikarma. Through such
continuous practice, the mind will reach a stage where it will not feel the slightest effort or disgust in action.
Though thousands of actions are done by our hands, the mind remains clear and calm. If you look up and question
the sky, "Brother sky, do you not get scorched by the sun? Don't you shiver with the cold?"
What answer do you expect? Will it not say, "You can settle what happens to me; I know nothing."
"Whether the man, who is mad, is naked or clad, Is a matter which bothers only the others."
This means that when we go on performing actions which are our svadharma, in order to purify the mind with the
help of vikarma, these actions become natural to us.
Even the most trying situations do not seem difficult. This is the key to karma yoga. If you try to force open a lock
without a key, you will only bruise your hands; with the key, you can open it in no time. This master-key, which
eliminates all strain and trouble; one gets by conquering the mind. So one must strive incessantly to achieve control
over the mind. In other words, one should wash off the dirt that appears in the mind in the course of action.
Then outward action will cease to cause trouble; even the feeling that "I am the doer" will vanish; kama and krodha,
craving and anger, will lose their power; there will be no trace of effort. Even the awareness of action will not
remain.
9. Once a good man wrote to me, "We have to do japa (recitation) of Ramanama a certain number of times. Please
do join us in this, and let me know how many you can do in a day." The poor man was acting to the best of his
knowledge : I am not saying this with the idea of criticizing him. But Ramanama is not the sort of thing to be
measured or counted. The mother tends the child. Does she ever want to publish reports on it?
If she cared for publicity, we could say, "Thank you," and discharge our debt to her. But she protests, "What have
I done? I have done nothing. Is this a burden to me?" When, with the help of vikarma, a man applies his mind, and
acts with full heart, it ceases to be karma and becomes akarma. In such action, there is no question of strain or
fatigue.
10. It is impossible to describe this state. We can only form a hazy picture of it in our minds. When the sun rises,
does the idea enter its mind to say, "I shall banish the darkness, I shall urge the birds to fly, and set men
working?" The sun just stands still, where it rises. But the very fact of its being makes all the world go round. But
the sun is not aware of this. If you said to the sun, "O Sun-God, the help you give is infinite; how much darkness
you have dispelled!" It would make no sense to him. He would say, "Bring a little darkness and show it to me.
If I can dispel it, I shall accept that I am the doer, and do all this." How can one carry darkness to the sun?
Because the sun exists, darkness keeps off. In the light of the sun, one man may read a good book, and another, an
obscene one; one may set fire to his neighbor's house, another help a neighbor. But the sun is not responsible for
the good or the evil to these acts. The sun says, "Light is my nature. What else but light could there be in me?
I am not aware that I am shedding light. For me, to be is to shine. I am not aware of the strain of giving light. I do
not feel that I am doing anything." The giving of light (prakash-dan) is natural to the sun. The saints too are like
that. Their very life is gift of light. If you tell a jnani "Sir you are a great man, you speak the truth," he would

answer, "If I do not follow truth, what else could I do? I am doing nothing special." There is no room for untruth
near the jnani.
Panini, the grammarian, chose this as an example, when he was teaching svaras pronunciation to his pupils. Right up
from the days of Panini, till today, the cock crows every morning. But no one ever thought of giving to the cock an
address of thanks and appreciation. One expects on recognition for acting according to one's nature. It is only
natural for good men to do good things like telling the truth, loving all creatures, finding no fault in others, and
being of service to everyone.
They cannot live otherwise. Do we specially honor a man for eating? Service to others comes naturally to a jnani,
just as eating, drinking and sleeping do to ordinary people. It is impossible for him to say, "I shall not help." We
should take it that the karma of such a jnani has become akarma. This condition has been given the holy status of
akarma which is sannyasa. The same state should also be called "karma-yoga."
Since the jnani goes on acting, it is "yoga" but since even while acting, he doesn't think of it, it is "sannyasa". Since,
in action he used a technique (yukti) which keeps him from being touched by it, it is yaga; and since even though
acting, he does not act, it is "sannyasa" (being given over to the eternal goodness).
One aspect of akarma : Yoga
12. What does sannyasa mean ,ultimately? It is giving up some actions, and doing others? No, the meaning of
sannyasa is "giving up all action." To be free from all action, not to act at all, that is sannyasa. But what does "not
acting" mean? Action is a curious thing. How can we give up all action? Action is in front of us and behind us, to
right and left of us; it spreads all round us in every direction.
Why, if we sit down, that too is action. Not only is "to sit" a verb in grammar, but sitting is a physical action. And if
we sit still for some time, the legs begin to ache; even sitting still is a strain. When doing nothing itself turns out
to be an action, how is it possible to give up action? The Lord revealed to Arjuna his Universal Form. Seeing its
vastness, Arjuna became afraid and shut his eyes; even then, the same form appeared within. If we see a thing
even when we shut our eyes, how can we escape from it? And how are we to avoid action which goes on even when
we are doing nothing?
13. A certain man had large quantities of valuable gold ornaments. He wished to keep them safely locked up in a big
box. His servant got a big strong steel box made for him. He looked at it and said, "You idiot! Have you no sense of
beauty or fitness? Would anyone keep these priceless ornaments in this ugly iron box? Go and get me a good gold
box." The servant did as he was told. "A gold box needs a gold lock," said the master. Starting out to hide the gold
from others' eyes, he finally succeeded in advertising it. There was no need for the thief to search for the gold.
He had only to carry away the box. Thus, not acting becomes a kind of action. How can one give up action which is so
all-pervasive?
14. But there is a way of renouncing action, and that is to devise a method by which, though we do all the actions in
the world, they melt and flow away from us. It i only when this becomes possible that we can say that sannyasa has
been reached. How to perform karma and yet make it melt and flow away? Look at the sun. It acts night and day.
Even at night it acts and lights up the other side of the earth.
Although it works all the time, no one ever talks of the sun working. That is why, in the Fourth Chapter, the Lord
says, "I taught this yoga first to Surya (the Sun-God). From him, Manu, the seeker and thinker, learnt it." Though
working all the twenty-four hours of the day, the sun does not act. There is no doubt that this condition is truly
wonderful.
The other aspect of akarma : Sannyasa
15. But this is only one form of sannyasa. One aspect of this state of akarma is that, though the man acts, he does
not act. The other aspect is that, though he does not act at all, he moves the whole world to action. There is in him

an immeasurable power to impel to action. This is the paradox of akarma : it is filled with a power that is capable of
infinite action. It is like steam which when compressed, does enormous work.
Steam that is enclosed gains tremendous power, and moves huge ships and long trains. It is the same with the sun
which does nothing at all but works all the twenty-four hours in the day. If asked, the sun would say, "I do nothing
at all." One aspect of the sun is that it works day and night and yet does nothing; the other, that while it does
nothing, it performs infinite action day and night. These are the two splendid sides of sannyasa.
And both are rare. In one aspect, the action is explicit, and the state of akarma implicit. In the other, though the
state of akarma is clearly manifest, yet, because of it, endless activity is continuously going on. In this state,
akarma is filled to overflowing with action, and thus mighty actions are achieved. There is a world of difference
between the man in this state, and the idler. The lazy man gets easily tired and depressed. But the sannyasi, who
does no work, conserves his power. He does not work at all. That is, he does not work with his limbs, or with his
mind. But even while he does nothing, he does infinite work.
16. Supposing someone we have offended is just silent, and does not speak when we go to him. Ho great is the
effect of his silence, his "renunciation of speech!" Another man in the same situation splutters out his indignation.
Both are angry; but while one does not open his mouth, the other bursts out. Both are examples of anger. Being
silent too is only a manifestation of anger. And it serves the purpose. How terrible it is for a child when its father
or mother stops speaking to it! Not speaking, giving up action, is far more effective than any kind of positive
action.
Silence can achieve what speaking cannot. Such is the state of the jnani. His non-action, his silence, his sitting still,
accomplishes much, releases great power for action. What action cannot achieve, these men, remaining inactive,
accomplish. This is the other side of sannyasa. In such sannyasa, all initiative and all effort come together and rest
in one place.
"The movement of action has stopped.
And sunk like a sack on the Lord's wings.
All care is over, and faith has come;
I dwell no more in the womb.
Not in my own being do I live;
The Lord has robbed me of my pride. "
Tuka says, "I live in the being of the One. I am empty and hollow." Tukaram says, "I am now empty, like a sack. All
activity is an end." But in that empty sack there is hidden a mighty energy. The sun calls aloud to no one; yet, at his
sight, birds fly, lambs frolic, the cows go out to graze in the forest, merchants open their shops, the farmer goes
to the field, all the world gets busy. It is enough that the sun exists. From it, endless actions take their rise. The
state of akarma is filled with the strength to move to infinite action, it is filled to the brim with infinite power.
Such is the other wonderful aspect of sannyasa.
Who can compare the two?
17. In the Fifth Chapter, the two ways of sannyasa are compared. One is doing nothing while working twenty-four
hours in the day the other is doing everything while not working even for a moment. The one is silence in speech,
the other is speech through silence. Let us consider these two divine states, and inquire about them, and meditate
upon them - there is a rare joy in it.
18. In fact, this whole matter is both rare and exalted. Truly, this idea of sannyasa is most holy, most beautiful.
We can never thank enough whoever it was that first sought and discovered an idea of such shining splendor. This
idea of sannyasa, one may say, is the highest point reached by man's intellect, his power of thought. Beyond this, no
man's thought has stretched, to this day. Attempts at higher flights are still going on, but neither in concept nor in
experience has anyone surpassed this. There is a rare joy in the very contemplation of this sannyasa with its two
aspects.

But when we come to the world of speech and action, the joy fails; we feel that we are falling. On this matter, I
have thought and talked with my friends for many years, and I have discovered the inadequacy of language to deal
with it.
19. It is a noble, delightful, poetical concept of doing every thing by doing nothing, and doing nothing in doing
everything. Where else but here could we find poetry? The famous masterpieces of poetry are insipid beside this.
No poem can compare with this idea in producing sheer joy, enthusiasm, energy and a sense of the divine.
Therefore, the Fifth Chapter has been established at a very high level. Till the Fourth Chapter; karma and vikarma
were described; now we are taken on a higher flight. Here the two aspects of the state of akarma are compared
before our eyes.
Here words stumble. Is the karma-yogi better, or the karma-sannyasi? Who really does more work? It is impossible
to answer these questions. Doing nothing though doing all the things, to do all things by doing nothing - both alike
are yoga; but for the sake of comparison, one is called yoga, the other sannyasa.
22. Just as Geometry wants us to postulate some things, bhakti wants us to postulate the presence of God in the
saligram. If he says, "God won't crack, but your saligram will; I shall give it a blow," he is not being clever. If you
can "postulate" in Geometry, why not in bhakti? Imagine a point, we say, and draw on the board a whole circle. But
if you start defining a point, it might turn out to be something like defining Brahma - The Absolute.
A point has no length, no width, no thickness, - nothing in fact. Though we define it thus, we represent it clearly on
the blackboard. Though it exists, it has no dimensions. The fact is that the true triangle or the true point, exists
only in definition, but we have to proceed on the assumption that they actually exist. In bhakti too, we have to
postulate the existence of the indestructible all-pervading God within the saligram. We shall now make the
comparison with the help of examples which we shall take to be perfect.
23. The mimamsakas, the interpreters of the Vedas, have done something delightful. In inquiring where God is,
they have given a very beautiful explanation. Regarding the gods who appear in the Vedas - Indra, Agni, and Varuna
-these questions arise : "What sort of person is this Indra? What is his form like? Where does he dwell?" And the
mimamsaka answers, "The word 'Indra' is the form of Indra. He lives in the word 'Indra'. The sounds 'Indra'
constitute his being? This is his figure; this is his measure." And what about Varuna? He too is Va-ru-na - that is
his form. We may extend this to Agni and the other gods.
All the gods are formed out of syllables - this image, this conception, is delightful. Our image of a god, the reality
called a god, cannot be contained in any form. To reveal the mental image, the syllables that make up his name are
good enough symbols. If asked, "What is God like?", we answer "G-O-D." In the end, 'Om' has worked wonders. It
has itself become God. It has become a symbol of God. It is necessary to invent such symbol, for these vast
concepts cannot be enclosed in any image or form; but man's desire is compulsive. He persists in attempting to give
body to such ideas.
The sannyasi and the yogi are one - Witness : Suka and Janaka
24. Sannyasa and yoga are both such high concepts that in their absolute form they cannot be embodied in any
human being. But though they cannot be contained by the body, they can be comprehended by the mind. We have to
stop with describing in words, what the perfect yoga and the perfect sannyasa are like. They will always remain
ideal and inaccessible but as examples we should take those who have approached the ideal.
Then, as in Geometry, we should take it that these are perfect yogis and perfect sannyasis. We illustrate sannyasa
by Suka and Yajnavalkya. As karma-yogis, the Gita itself mentions Janaka and Sri Krishna. Lokamanya Tilak, in GitaRahasya, gives a long list, "Janaka, Sri Krishna and others followed this path; Suka, Yajnavalkya and others followed
that path." But thinking a little, one sees that the distinction vanishes as if written within water.
Yajnavalkya was a sannyasi, Janaka was a karma-yogi.
That is, Janaka, the karma-yogi was a disciple of Yajnavalkya, the sannyasi; but Sukadeva, the sannyasi was the
disciple of this same Janaka. Suka was the disciple of Janaka, who was the disciple of Yajnavalkya. First the

sannyasi, then the karma-yogi, and then again the sannyasi, so the garland is strung. Thus yoga and sannyasa
succeed each other in the same line.
25. Vyasa said to Suka, "Suka, my son, you have, no doubt, attained wisdom, but no guru has yet set his seal on you.
Go therefore to Janaka." Sukadeva went. Janaka was sitting on the third floor of his great palace. Suka was a
forest-dweller. His eyes drank in the sights of the city as he went along.
Janaka asked him, "Why have you come here?"
Suka answered, "To get knowledge."
"Who sent you?"
"Vyasadeva."
"Where do you come from?"
"From the ashram."
"What did you see in the market on the way?"
"I saw rows upon rows of sweets piled up on all sides."
"And what else did you see?"
"I saw sugar-dolls walking and talking."
"And what else?"
"For my coming up here, there were solid sugar steps."
"What else did you find?"
"Here too, I see sugar pictures everywhere."
"What do you see now?"
"One sugar doll talking to another."
Then Janaka said, "Now you may go. You have attained all wisdom."
Suka had secured what he wanted, a signed certificate from Janaka. The point is that the karma-yogi had
accepted as disciple the sannyasi Suka. Suka no doubt, remained a sannyasi, but how delightful the situation is!
Parikshit was under a curse - he was to die in seven days. He had to get ready for his death. He needed a guru who
could teach him how to die. He sent for Sukacharya, who came and sat cross-legged for 24 x 7 = 168 hours,
narrating the Bhagavata. He did not once change his position, and went on with his story without a break. What is
wonderful about this is that, though he had to work intensely for seven whole days, he felt no strain. Though he
was constantly working it was as if he did not work at all. He had not even a feeling of effort. The truth is that
sannyasa and karma-yoga are not two different things.
26. Hence, the Lord says, "ekam saankhyam cha yogam cha yah pasyati sa pasyati." "He truly sees, who sees
sankhya and yoga as one." He who realizes that sankhya and yoga are one, can be said to have understood the real
secret. The one acts while being inactive, and the other, though he acts, does not feel the effort. A real sannyasi
one who is in constant samadhi, and free from all distorting passion - if we keep one such with us for ten days, what
light, what energy, he radiates! What could not be achieved by repeated efforts through the years, comes easy
because we look at him because he is with us.
When the mind is purified by a look at a photograph, when the
heart is filled with devotion, love and holiness by looking at the picture of a dead person, what inspiration can we
not derive from seeing a live sannyasi?
27. The sannyasi and the yogi alike bring good to the world. In the one case, through it seems as though action has
been renounced, this state of renunciation is filled to the brim with action. It holds boundless creative power and
illumination. Both the sannyasi and karma-yogi are jnanis, seers, and are entitled to the same high throne. Though
the names are different, the substance is the same. They are two modes of the same reality.
A wheel in rapid motion seems at rest. The state of the sannyasi is similar. From his shanti, his peace and
steadiness, flows infinite power, endless movement. Mahavira, Buddha, and Nivrittinatha were such realized souls.
Though all the endeavors of the sannyasi have ceased, and come to a rest, he does mighty deeds. As stone means
pashana and pashana means stone, "sannyasa" means "karma-yoga" and "karma-yoga" means "sannyasa".

And yet yoga is to be preferred to sannyasa
28. Though all this is true, yet the Lord adds a qualification. He says that karma-yoga is better than sannyasa.
When the two are identical, why should the Lord prefer one? Is this a joke? When the Lord says that karma-yoga
is better, he speaks from the standpoint of the sadhaka, the seeker after perfection. To do nothing and yet to do
all things, is possible for the siddha, the perfected one, not for the sadhaka, the seeker.
But even he can practice in some measure the method of doing all things and yet doing nothing. The one rule is
impossible for the seeker, it is appropriate only to the siddha; but the other is practicable to a certain extent,
even for the seeker. Action through inaction is a riddle beyond the understanding of the sadhaka. Karma-yoga is
both the way and the goal, but sannyasa is only the goal. From the point of view of the sadhaka, karma-yoga is
preferable to sannyasa.
29. On the same principle, the Lord, in the Twelfth Chapter, stresses, the saguna (God with form) rather than the
nirguna (God without form). The saguna engages the mind and the senses, while the nirguna does not. The nirguna
has no use for, the devotee's hands, feet or eyes - all his senses remain inactive. The sadhaka, is not able to use
them aright for their own fulfillment. But in saguna, the hands can see the Lord's form, the ears can hear His
praises, the hands can offer worship to Him and serve human beings, the feet can take him on pilgrimage - thus all
the organs are assigned appropriate work, and gradually given over to Hari, the Lord.
But in nirguna, there is a ban on all this - the mouth is shut, the ears are closed, the hands and feet bound. The
poor sadhaka looks at this state of being bound in and shut up, and is frightened. How could nirguna find a place in
his heart? If he sat in silence, his mind will soon be filled with a succession of unrelated thoughts. And the nature
of the senses is such that they invariably do what they are told not to do.
Isn't that so in advertisements? They write, "Don't read this," on top of something and everybody reads it first.
You say, "Don't read this," to see that everybody reads it and reads it attentively. In nirguna the mind wanders.
Not so in saguna-bhakti. Here there is arati and puja (ritual worship), and compassion and service to living beings;
here there is work for the senses. Once you have engaged the senses in work, you can say to your mind, "Now you
can go where you like."
But then the mind wants to go nowhere, it is delighted to stay; without knowing it, it is one-pointed. But if you try
consciously to concentrate it on something, it will run away and escape you. If you engage the various senses in
noble and beautiful tasks, and then give the mind freedom to wander, it would prefer to stay. It will say, "I shall
stay where I am." But if you order it to sit quiet, it will stay, "I'm off."

30. Because man has a body, saguna is easier and therefore better. The art of acting and yet no clinging to it, is
preferable to action through inaction, because it is easier. There is room in karma-yoga for effort and practice.
Through karma-yoga one can learn to control the senses and, little by little, detach the mind from all activity. And
if the method does not succeed today, it is bound to succeed some day. Ease in practice distinguishes karma-yoga
from sannyasa, but in the state of perfection, they are the same.
Though their names are different, and they appear to be two, they are in reality one. In one, the demon of karma is
dancing without, but peace reigns within. In the other, though nothing is done, there is a power to shake the three
worlds. In both cases, the reality is different from the appearance. If perfect karma-yoga is sannyasa, perfect
sannyasa is karma-yoga. There is no difference; but for the seeker, karma-yoga is easy. In the perfect state, both
are one.
31. Changadev sent a letter to Jnanadev. It was just a piece of blank paper. Jnanadev was younger in years, so he
could not begin respectfully with "pujya ... ...". He could not begin with the blessing, "chironjivi ... ...", because
Jnanadev was superior in wisdom. He could not decide how to begin the letter. So Changadev sent off the blank
(kora) paper. It first reached the hands of Nivrittinath. He read it and gave it to Jnanadev. Jnanadev too read it
and gave it to Muktabai.

Muktabai read it and said, "Changadev has become so big, but he is still kora, hollow." Nivrittinath read another
meaning in it. He said Changadev is kora, innocent; he is pure and taintless and deserves to be taught." And he
asked Jnanadev to answer this letter. Jnanadev wrote a letter of sixty-five onvis (marathi stanzas).
It is still known as "Changadev's Sixty-five." Such is the delightful story of this letter. It is easy to read what is
written, but very difficult what is not written. You never come to the end of it. In the same way, though the
sannyasi seems a hollow reed (kora), a blank piece of paper, he is full of illimitable action.
32. In the perfect state, sannyasa and karma-yoga are of equal worth, but the practical value of karma-yoga is
higher. A currency note for fifty rupees, and a gold coin of the same value, so long as the government is stable, are
of equal worth. But if there is a Revolution, the note is worth nothing. You can always get something in exchange
for the gold coin, for it is, after all, gold.
In the ultimate state, renunciation of karma and karma-yoga are of equal value, because, in both, there is equal
jnana (knowledge) and its value is ananta, infinite. No matter what you add to infinity, the value remains infinite.
When karma-tyaga and karma-yoga are added to perfect jnana which is infinity, they become equivalent. But once
you remove jnana from both sides of the equation, karma-yoga is more valuable than karma-tyaga to the sadhaka,
the seeker. It is only when we add firm, pure jnana to both, that they become equal.
When the goal has been reached, jnana + karma = jnana + akarma. For the sadhaka it is difficult even to understand
action through inaction. He can understand inaction through action. Karma-yoga is found both in the path and in
goal, but sannyasa only in the goal, and not in the path. In the terminology of the shastras, karma-yoga is both the
way and the goal, the sadhan and the nishtha, but sannyasa is only nishtha. And "nishtha" means the ultimate state.
CONTROLLING THE MIND Keenness for self-development
1. In the Fifth Chapter, we were able to see, through imagination and inquiry, how high a man can soar. Karma,
vikarma and akarma, together complete the sadhana, the path. Karma is gross. In all our actions performed as
svadharma, there should be the accompanying action of the mind. The action performed for educating the mind is
vikarma, which is special karma or subtle karma. Karma and vikarma are both necessary, and as we go on practicing
both, we lay the foundation of akarma.
In the last chapter we saw how, here karma and sannyasa become one. In the beginning of the Sixth Chapter, the
Lord says again that though the stand of the karma-yogi seems different from that of the sannyasi, they are quite
the same. The difference is only in the way of looking at things. The aim of the latter chapters is to discover the
path to reach the state described in Chapter Five.
2. Many people mistakenly imagine that the spiritual life, and books like the Gita, are intended only for ascetics.
When a man says, "I am not an ascetic," he seems to imply that ascetics form a species, like horses, lions, bears
and cows; and it is further implied that the spiritual life is only intended for that species. It is as if all other
creatures in the work-a-day world belong to some different species with thoughts and ways of its own. Such
thinking has divided humanity into two kinds of beings, ascetics and worldly men. Lokamanya Tilak has drawn our
attention to this in his Gita Rahasya. I whole-heartedly endorse his view that the Gita is a scripture intended for
ordinary men, living their daily lives in the world. The Bhagavad Gita is for the whole world. All the spiritual
practices are for every man in the world. Paramartha, the higher knowledge, teaches us how, by keeping our lives
pure, we can attain equilibrium and peace of mind. The Gita tells us how our lives can be kept pure. It comes to your
help wherever you are doing something.
But it is not content with leaving you just there; it takes you by the hand and leads you right to the goal. Don't we
know the famous saying, "If the mountain does not come to Muhammad, Muhammad will go to the mountain"?
Muhammad wishes that his message should reach even the lifeless mountain. Indeed, because the mountain is
lifeless, Muhammad would not expect the mountain to walk up to him.

The same is true with the Gita. It is prepared to go to the lowest, the weakest, the least cultured of men. And it
goes to him not to keep him where he is, but to grasp him by the hand and lift him up. The Gita wishes that man
should make his actions pure, and attain the highest state. That is why the Gita is there.
3. Therefore, don't raise a fence round yourself, saying, "I am stupid, I am an ordinary fellow, wallowing in
worldliness." Don't say, "What can I do? My whole being is contained in this six-foot body." And don't raise such
boundary walls around yourself and behave like an animal. Be bold enough to move forward and climb upward.

"Uddharet atmanaatmaanam naatmaanamavasaadayet."
"Let a man raise the self by the Self; let him not debase himself."
Have a courage to say, "I shall surely lift myself up." Do not kill the power of your mind, thinking, "I am a worthless
worldly creature." Do not clip the wings of imagination; spread them out. Take the chandul as your model. When it
sees the rising sun, it thinks it can reach the sun, and flies towards it. We too should be like that. However high
the poor chandul flies, can it ever reach the sun? But through the imagination, it can certainly attain the sun.
But our behavior is just the opposite. We do not rise even as high as we can, but instead, we cramp our imagination,
weaken our power of growth, and so flutter down to earth. Even the power that is ours, we lose by undervaluing it.
When imagination is crippled one cannot but fall down. Let the imagination, therefore, be upward-looking. Since man
progresses with the help of the imagination, do not throttle it.

Don't whine "Brother, do not leave the beaten track;
Stay where you are in the world, don't wander here and there in vain."
Don't dishonor your soul. The seeker can be steady only when he has wide imagination and self-confidence. Only by
these can he sustain himself and grow. But give up the feeling that dharma is intended only for sadhus and
sannyasis, that when you go to sadhus and sannyasis, it is only to get certificate from them that, situated as you
are, you are doing the best you can.
Do not bind yourself by thinking such self-stultifying thoughts. Without noble thoughts and aspiration you cannot
advance one step. If you have this vision, this aspiration, this noble confidence, then it is necessary to alter and
adjust the means; else, the whole thing comes to an end. To help outward action, the mental process, called vikarma
was prescribed. To complete karma, vikarma is constantly necessary. We saw, in the Fifth Chapter the divine state
of akarma reached with the help of these two, and its varieties.
From this Sixth Chapter onwards are described the varieties of vikarma. The means of inward growth (sadhana) is
described. But before explaining the sadhana, the Gita says, "Brother Soul, you can become one with God. Hold on
to this divine aspiration. Set free the mind, and strengthen its wings." Of this sadhana or vikarma, there are many
kinds, like bhakti-yoga (devotion), dhyana (meditation), jnana-vijnana (inquiry and analysis), guna-vikasa (the
development of the personality), and atmaanaatma-viveka (discrimination between the Self and non-Self). In the
Sixth Chapter is described the kind of sadhana called dhyana-yoga (the way of meditation).
One-pointedness of mind
4. There are three important things in dhyana-yoga (the way of meditation), namely
(1) one-pointedness of mind,
(2) setting bounds to one's life, to help achieve this, and

(3) a state of equanimity or evenness of vision. Without these no true progress is possible.
One-pointedness of mind means controlling its movements. Setting bounds to one's life means doing actions after
weighing and measuring them. Evenness of vision means having the nobility to think in terms of the whole world.
These three together mark up dhyana-yoga. To achieve these three, one needs the help of abhyasa (practice) and
vairagya (detachment). Let us now consider these five.
5. First, one-pointedness of mind. Whatever one may be doing, the mind should concentrate on it. Even in worldly
affairs, such concentration is essential. It is not as if the qualities needed for worldly success are different from
those needed for spiritual progress. The attempt to purify one's daily activities is spiritual life. Whatever one
does, trade or research or politics, its success or failure depends on one's concentration on it. It is said of
Napoleon that, after completing his arrangements for battle, he would lose himself in mathematical theories right
on the field.
Amidst showers of bullets, and dying soldiers, Napoleon's mind was absorbed in mathematics. Not that I say that
Napoleon's concentration was of the highest. We know examples of higher kinds of concentration, but I wanted you
to see how great his concentration was. Of Caliph Omar too, it is said that in the midst of a battle, when it was
time for namaz, he would draw in his thoughts and, kneeling in the battle-field, would begin to pray; his
concentration was such that he did not even know whose men were mowed down. If Islam spread far and wide it
was because of the devotion to God and one-pointedness of the early Mussalmans.
6. The other day I heard a story. There was a fakir. An arrow had entered his body. The pain was unbearable. But
any attempt to pull the arrow out would make it worse. They didn't know of chloroform or other anaesthetics in
those days. It was a difficult situation. Some people who knew him came forward and said, "Don't try to pull out
the arrow now. It will be easy to do so when he is at prayer." The time came for namaz. The fakir settled down to
pray. In a moment his mind became one-pointed, and he did not know that the arrow was pulled out.
Look at the power of concentration!
7. The idea is that, whether in worldly or in spiritual matters, success is hard to come by without one-pointedness
of mind. If the mind is concentrated, one will never lack ability. Even if you are an old man of sixty, you will have
the enthusiasm and energy of a youth. As one grows older, one's mind should get stronger. Look at a fruit. It is
green at first, then it ripens and shrinks and falls off, but, all this time, the seed within gets stronger.
The outer body will wither, will fall, but that is not the essential part of the fruit. The essential part, the soul, is
the seed. It is the same with our bodies. Even as the body grows older, memory should grow stronger, and
knowledge brighter. But this rarely happens. One says, "My memory is getting weaker these days." "Why?" "Age is
growing on me." Your wisdom, learning, memory - these are the seeds. As the body becomes infirm with age, the
soul grows correspondingly stronger. But this is impossible without one-pointedness.
How to achieve one-pointedness
8. One-pointedness is, of course, necessary, but how does one come by it? What should one do in order to get it?
The Lord says one should fix the mind in the Self and "think of nothing else" (na kinchidapi chintayet).
But then, how is this to be done? To make the mind perfectly calm is a great thing. Unless one stops with force the
revolving wheel of thoughts, how can one attain one-pointedness? Even if the outer wheel is somehow stopped, the
inner wheel will go on revolving. As we use more and more external means to concentrate the mind, the inner wheels
revolve all the faster. You may cross your legs, sit straight, and fix your gaze. But the mind won't become onepointed because of this. The important thing is to be able to still the wheels of the mind.
9. The fact of the matter is, concentration is impossible, unless we keep within banks the samsara which fills and
overflows our minds and the outer world. We should not, as we, do now, expend the soul's boundless power of
knowledge on trivial external objects. Just as the man who has made his wealth not by robbing others, but by hard
work, would not squander it, even so, we should not waste our power of knowledge by thinking of trivial things.

Discrimination is a priceless treasure and yet we spend it on gross matters. "This vegetable is not well-cooked; it
needs more salt." What if it lacks a pinch of salt, brother? So much thought is spent on a petty matter like this!
We teach children within the four walls of the school-room, because, under the trees, they would be distracted by
crows, and sparrows and would not be able to concentrate their minds. They are only children. So long as they do
not see the birds, they concentrate their minds. We have grown big like horses. We have even got horns.
Therefore, even if we are enclosed in a seven-walled city, our minds wander, for we go on discussing all the trifling
little things in the world. The power of thought which can lead us to God, we are content to employ in talk of the
taste of vegetables.

10. This fearful samsara is raging day and night all round us, within and without. Even in our prayer, the motive is
outward benefit. We don't think of union with God, forgetting samsara for a moment. Even prayer is a mere show.
When the mind is in this state, assuming a posture and shutting one's eyes are all in vain. Because the mind is
forever running adrift, man's whole strength is lost. There is no kind of discipline or control in him. We see this at
every step in our country.
Indeed, our land is a home of spiritual pursuit. Our people are looked upon as having ready wings with which to fly in
the upper air. In such a land, what a pitiable state is ours? One is pained to see so much anxiety and so much
discussion devoted to silly little matters. Our minds are immersed in triviality.
"Sacred stories send us to sleep;
Care keeps us awake in bed.
Obscure is the way of karma;
Why weep?"
The mind is fixed on nothing, or on too many things. Nowhere do we see one-pointedness. What a slave to the
senses is man! Once, someone asked, "Why is it said that the eyes should be half-open and half-shut?" I said, "The
answer is easy. If you shut the eyes completely, you fall asleep. If you keep them fully open, they turn on all sides
and prevent concentration. The sleep that comes to closed eyes is tamas. The manifold activity of wide-open eyes
is rajas.
Therefore, the intermediate state is prescribed."
It means that, till the mind changes, no concentration is possible. The state of the mind should be pure and this
can't be achieved by assuming an erect posture. All our activity should be pure. To purify activity, its motive should
be transformed. Activity should not be pursued for one's individual profit, for satisfying the instincts, or for
outward objects.
11. All day long we are engaged in activities. What is the purpose of thus day-long labor?
"The purpose of all my effort?
Is to make my last day sweet."
All this running about, this endless effort and toil, is it not because we want our final day on earth to be happy? All
the bitter sufferings of our life, what are they for? To make the last moment, the moment of death, holy. Evening
comes at the end of the day. If we have done all the work of the day with the pure heart, the evening prayer is
sweet. If the last moment of the day is sweet, the day's work has found its reward. Then the mind easily becomes
one-pointed.
For concentration, such purity of life is essential. Thought of outward objects should be avoided. Man's life is not
long but he has the power, even in this brief life, to taste the bliss of God. Two men may appear to be cast in the
same mould - two eyes, a nose in between and two nostrils. Thus the two men are similar, and yet one is like a god,
the other a beast. Why so? Both are children of the same God - "all pots of the same clay" - but why this
difference? One can hardly believe they belong to the same species. While one is a god in human form, the other is
a monkey!

12. Both in past ages and amongst us today, there have been men who know what heights man can rise to. This is a
matter of experience. Now as in the past, there have been men to show what power there is in the human body. If
man can achieve such miracles, dwelling in the body, why then can I not? Why should I set limits to my imagination?
I too have the same human body with which others have become heroes of humanity; why then should I be in this
plight? I am making some mistake. My mind is always roaming abroad. It is so busy judging others. But where is the
need for me to judge others?
"Why look at the good and bad in others;
Are my own faults few?"
If I am always absorbed in observing tiny little things in others, how can my mind become one-pointed? In
this condition, I can only be one of two things, asleep (in a state of nothingness) or distracted (at many
points). I am caught in tamas or rajas. It is true that the Lord tells us how to sit, how to direct the eyes
and so on, to make the mind one-pointed. But it is only when we have first realized the need for onepointedness, that these have value. Once a man is firmly convinced of the indispensability of onepointedness, then he will seek and find for himself the means to attain it. Living within bounds
13. Another aid to concentration is to set bounds to one's life. All our actions must be measured and weighed.
Precision, the secret of mathematics, should be found in all our actions. As we measure out each dose of medicine
before taking it, our sleep and food too should be in measure. This should be so everywhere in our life. All our
senses should be under strict watch, to see that we do not sleep too much, or eat too much, or even look at too
many things.
14. One gentleman said of another, "When he enters a room, he notes in a second what things are kept in it, and
where." I said to myself, "Lord, may I never have this power!" Am I his secretary, or am I a thief that I should
compile and keep in my head an inventory of his possessions? How does it concern me where he keeps his soap or
his watch? Of what use is this knowledge to me?

We should stop employing our eyes thus uselessly. And we should restrain our ears as well. Some people seem to
think that it would be wonderful to have ears like a dog's. Then they could turn in any direction we want. It is
certainly a defect that our ears are fixed like this. But we don't need this useless power. As it is, the mind is far
too busy. The slightest noise, the slightest disturbance, and our minds are drawn to it.
15. Therefore I say, establish order and discipline in your life. Let us not look at bad things, or read bad books.
Let us not listen to praise or slander others. Let us turn away not only from bad things, but also from excess of
even good things. Avoid greed of all kinds.
Of course, we should never have wine or pakoras or rasagullas, but even of bananas or oranges we can have too
many. Fruit is of course pure food, but even of that one can have too much. The master within will not tolerate the
license of the tongue. The senses should realize that the Lord within would surely punish them if they did what
they liked. Disciplined conduct is called setting bounds to life.
(29) Friendly outlook
16. The third thing is a balanced outlook, which is the same thing as a friendly outlook. Without this, the mind
cannot become one-pointed. The lion is the mighty king of the forest and yet he does not take four steps forward
without looking behind. How can the lion, that lives by violence, attain concentration of mind? The eyes of the lion,
the crow and the cat constantly rove about. Their look shows fear and suspicion. Such is the state of animals, that
are violent. But we should develop a sense of equality. All creation should appear to us auspicious and friendly. I
should trust all creatures as I trust myself.
17. What have we to fear? All things are pure, all things holy.

Visvam tat bhadram yadavanti devah.
This Universe is auspicious, full of goodness, because God looks after it. As Browning says,

"God's in his heaven All's right with the world!"
Nothing is wrong in this world. If there is anything wrong, it is my vision. As is my vision, so is the world. If I wear
red glasses the world too would appear red and aflame.
18. Ramdas, as he wrote his Ramayana, read it out to his students. Unknown to anyone, Hanuman too would come
and sit among them, and listen to it. Samarth Ramdas had written, "Hanuman reached the ashoka-grove and he saw
the white flowers there." Hearing this, Hanuman appeared suddenly and said, "I saw no white flowers; the flowers
I saw were red. What you have written is wrong. Correct it." Samarth insisted, "I have written right. The flowers
you saw were white." Hanuman would not yield; he said, "It was I that went there. Would I tell a lie?" The dispute
was at last taken to Sri Ramachandra. "The flowers were, of course, white," he said, "but Hanuman's eyes were red
with anger, and saw the pure white as red." The point of this charming story is that what the world appears us to
be, depends on the vision we have of it.
19. So long as we do not feel sure that the whole creation is auspicious, the mind will not be one-pointed. As long as
we think that something is wrong with the world, we look at all things with suspicion. Poets sing of the happy
freedom of birds, but let them try being a bird for a while. Then they would know that a bird's freedom is really
worth. The neck of a bird dances back and forth all the time. It is ever afraid of others. If you put your bird on
the seat of meditation, will it attain one-pointedness?
If we approach it, it would fly away at once, afraid that we mean to kill it. Those whose minds are filled with the
fearful idea that the whole world destroys and devours, what can they know of peace? So long as the thought that
I alone defend myself, and all others are devourers, does not leave the mind, there can be no one-pointedness. For
this, the best means is the bhavana, the attitude of equality. Once you start seeing friendliness everywhere, the
mind will, of itself, attain peace.
20. Take an unhappy man to the banks of a clear running river. At the sight of the pure, calm, flowing water he
ceases to be restless, he forgets his troubles. Whence did this moving water gain such power? The benign power of
God is manifested through this. The Vedas are full of beautiful descriptions of streams -

"atishthantiinaam anivesanaanaam".
Such are these streams. The stream flows without a break, it has no resting-place, no home of its own, it is a

sannyasi. Such a pure stream calms my mind in a moment. When I look at such a lovely stream, will not a spring of
love and wisdom well up in my heart?
21. If this lifeless water without can confer such serenity on my mind, how much deeper the peace if, in the valley
of the mind, there should spring up the living stream of bhakti and jnana!
Once a friend of mine was wandering in Kashmir, among the Himalayas. He used to write to me describing the holy
mountains and lovely streams there. I replied to him, "These streams and mountain ranges and sweet air that give
you peerless joy, I can experience them all in my heart. I behold these lovely sights constantly in the world within.
That is why, though you invite me, I shall not leave behind the bliss of this divine Himalaya."

"sthaavaraanaam himaalayah."
The Lord declared, "Among mountains I am Himalaya." One worships the Himalaya, the symbol of steadfastness, in
order to attain steadfastness. And if on hearing its description, I deserted my post of duty, what would I gain?

22. The meaning of it all is that we should calm the mind a little. If one looks at the world with friendly eyes, a
perennial stream will spring in the heart, divine stars will shine in the inner firmament. When the mind gains peace
from the sight of sacred objects made of stone and clay, will it not do so by the vision of the inner world?
Once, during a visit to Trivandrum, I was sitting on the beach. The boundless sea, its majestic roaring and the
evening hour quietened my mind, and I sat still. My friend brought me some fruit to eat. But at that time, even this
sattvik, this innocent food, was like poison to me. The roaring "Om," "Om" of the sea reminded me of the phrase
from the Gita: "maamanusmara yuddhya cha," "Remember me and fight on." The sea was constantly remembering
and naming the Lord, and at the same time doing its work.
A wave came forward and went back, and then another. The sea had not a moment's rest. At sight of this, my
hunger and thirst disappeared. When you come to think of it, what is there in the sea? If the sight of the salt sea
waves rising and falling could make my heart rejoice, how would I dance with joy when the unfathomable ocean of
my heart throws up waves of wisdom and love! The waves of this ocean were beating in the heart of the Vedic seer
-

"antah samudre hridi antaraayushi
ghritasya dhaaraa obhichaakasiimi
samudraaduurmir madhumaan udaarat."
The commentators have found it difficult to explain this divine language. What are these streams of ghee and
honey rising within the heart? Will waves of brine rise in the ocean of my heart? No, no. In the ocean of my heart,
waves of milk, honey, ghee are beating.
Child-preceptor
23. Learn to behold this ocean of the heart. Look up at the cloudless sky outside and make the heart clear and
pure. To tell the truth, one-pointedness of mind is child's play, an ordinary thing. It is distraction of mind that is
unnatural, artificial. Look steadily into eyes of a little child. While it looks at you intently, you have blinked a dozen
times. Children's minds become easily one-pointed. Show a little child, four or five months old, the rich greenness
of Nature without.
It will gaze intently on it. Mothers think that, if a child looks at green trees and plants, even its motions are green
- it is as if all its senses are in its eyes when it looks through them. Any little incident makes a powerful impression
on the child's mind. Educationists regard the first three or four years of a child's education as the really
effective part of education. No matter how many Universities, or High Schools or Cultural Associations you
establish, one never gets again what one had in the first few years. I have had something to do with education.
Day by day my conviction becomes stronger that the effect of this formal education is just nothing. The
impressions formed in the earliest years are set as in hard cement. Latter education is like superficial plastering or
the color wash outside. By using soap and water, you can wash off dirt from the body, but how to wash off color of
one's skin? Thus the first impressions are hard to remove.
How is it that the first impressions are so strong, and the latter ones weak? It is because in childhood onepointedness of mind comes naturally. Because of this one-pointedness of mind, impressions then received are
indelible. Such is the power of one-pointedness. There is nothing impossible for those who have it.
24. Today our whole life has become artificial. Our childhood is lost to us. There is no richness, no real joy in life,
it has dried up. We act waywardly, capriciously. It is not Darwin but we ourselves that prove by actions that the
ape is our ancestor.
The little child is trustful. Its mother's word is its authority. It never occurs to it to question the truth of the
stories it hears. "The crow said," "The sparrow said," - all this sounds true to the child. Because of this innocence
and friendliness, the child becomes easily one-pointed.
Practice, detachment, faith

25. For dhyana-yoga (the way of meditation), it is thus seen that one-pointedness of mind, disciplined living and a
friendly and balanced outlook are necessary. Besides these, two other aids, detachment and practice, are
mentioned. The first is a negative, destructive method, the other, positive and constructive. To uproot and throw
away the weeds from the field is destructive work - this is vairagya, detachment. To sow seeds in the field is
constructive work. To think good thoughts again and again is abhyasa, practice. Vairagya is negative, abhyasa is
positive work.
26. How to acquire vairagya? The mango, we say, is sweet. But is this sweetness only in the fruit? No, it is not in
the fruit alone. We pour the sweetness of the Self into objects and then they taste sweet. Therefore, learn to
taste the sweetness within. The sweetness of external objects is not in themselves. But the sweetness of all sweet
things, "rasaanaam rasatamah" the sea of this sweetness, is the Self within me. As I go on meditating that all
sweet objects, gain their sweetness from the Self, vairagya fills the mind. Mother Sita gave a pearl necklace to
Hanuman. Hanuman pulling out the pearls, bit them one by one, tasted each and threw it away. In none of them
could he find Rama. Rama was in his heart. For these same pearls, people give even lakhs of rupees!
27. In describing dhyana-yoga, the Lord has taught us an important lesson at the very beginning. And that is, that
one should make a firm resolve, "I have to raise myself by my own effort. But I will rise; I shall reach the heavens.
I will not lie helpless in this human body. I will dare approach God, and make all the effort needed for it."
Listening to all this, Arjuna had a doubt. He said, "My days are over, Lord. If in a short while I die, what is the use
of all this sadhana, this practice?" The Lord replied, "Death is only a long sleep." Every day after working hard, we
sleep seven or eight hours. If anyone afraid of this sleep? We worry only when we do not get sleep. Like sleep,
death too is necessary. Just as we wake up from sleep and resume our work, our former sadhana will avail us after
death.
28. Jnanadev in his Jnanesvari has written some verses in this context which seem to reveal his own inner life.
"All knowledge came of itself in childhood, all the shastras sprang into speech of their own accord."
These lines show the abhyasa of a former birth draws you. The minds of some are not drawn to the objects of
sense. They do not know what moha, delusion, is. For, they have, in a former birth completed their sadhana, their
preparation. The Lord gives the assurance, "One who treads the path of righteousness, my son, will never come to
grief." His effort will not be wasted. We are given this faith at the end of the Chapter. What is imperfect shall be
made perfect. Accept this teaching of the Lord and make your life truthful.

PRAPATTI OR SURRENDER TO GOD
The sublime vision of bhakti
1. Brothers, when Arjuna faced the problem of maintaining his svadharma, his mind was perplexed by the illusion of
"mine" and "not mine," and he began to seek ways to escape his svadharma. This futile illusion of his was shown in
the First Chapter. The Second Chapter set out to remove this illusion. That the soul is indestructible and allpervading, that the body is transient, and that one should never give up one's svadharma - these three principles
were stated there.
The method of realizing these principles was also taught; this technique is the renunciation of the fruits of action.
In explaining this karma-yoga, three things - karma, vikarma and akarma - emerged. In the fifth chapter, we saw
the two aspects of akarma produced by the union of karma and vikarma. From the Sixth Chapter was explained the
importance of one pointedness for the sadhaka, the seeker.
Today we deal with the Seventh Chapter. This Chapter, one might say, opens out a beautiful new mansion of

vikarma. As one reads the Gita, one gets the impression of being in the temple of Nature, of walking through a
mighty forest, seeing many beautiful sights. In the Sixth Chapter we dwelt in the mansion of one-pointedness; now
we shall enter another mansion.

2. Before throwing open the doors of this mansion, the Lord makes us understand the secret of the structure of
this enticing world. On the same kind of paper and with the same brush, an artist paints a variety of pictures. The
vina-player, out of seven notes, makes so many different ragas (modes of music). With the few letters in the
alphabet, we express an endless variety of thoughts and feelings. Look on this creation too in the same light. There
are in it innumerable objects, and many modes of being.
But all this exterior and interior creation is made up of two things - the indivisible atman and the eightfold forms
of Nature. The anger of the angry man, the love of the lover, the agony of the sufferer, the happiness of the
happy one, the drowsiness of the idler, the activity of the worker - all these are the play of the same power of
chaitanya, consciousness. At the root of these contradictory movements, and filling them all, is a single
Consciousness. As the Consciousness within is one, so too is the outer veil single in its nature. The Lord tells us in
the beginning that all creation is born of the conscient atman, the self and the inconscient Nature.
3. While everywhere spirit and body, the supernatural and the natural, are thus one, why is man caught in illusion?
Why does he see difference? While the face of a loving man is pleasant to look at, the sight of another fills us
with disgust. Why are we attracted by one and repelled by the other? The same pencil, the same paper, the same
artist; and yet the various pictures reveal various kinds of emotion.
The skill of the artist lies precisely here. There is a skill in the fingers of the painter or the vina-player that
makes us laugh and cry. All the magic is in the fingers of the artist.
This man is near to me, the other distant; this is mine, that is his - such thoughts arise in our minds, and on
occasions deflect us from our duty all because of delusion. If we are to escape this, we should learn the secret of
the creative skill of the Lord's fingers.
The Brihadaaranyaka Upanishad gives the drum (dundubhi) as an example. The same drum gives out many kinds of
sound. Some frighten me, others make me dance. If I am to master all these emotions, I have to catch hold of the
drummer. Once he is in our hands, all the notes too are in our hands. In one word the Lord says, "Those who wish to
cross maya, let them take refuge in me."
"Only those who are surrendered to me will escape the play of maya; for them, the waters of maya dry up here and
now."
What then is this that we call "maya"? The power of God, His art, the skill of His hand - this is what we call maya.
Maya is nothing but the power of the art of the Creator who out of atman and prakriti (Spirit and Nature), - or, in
Jain terminology, jiva and ajiva (the living and the non-living) - out of these materials, formed this many-colored
world. Just as in the jail we have bread made of the same grain, and 'dal' containing various spices, in the same way
there is the indivisible spirit and eightfold nature.
Out of these the Lord creates an endless variety of things. Seeing this, we experience many contradictory
emotions of good and bad. If we are transcending these wishes to attain true peace, we should try and catch hold
of the maker of them all, and, become friends with him. It is only when we come to know Him that we can escape
the delusion which causes division and attachment.
4. In the Seventh Chapter, the Lord has thrown open the beautiful mansion of bhakti, the powerful vikarma, the
effective means, for knowing Him. To attain purity of mind many vikarmas are prescribed, like yajna and dana
(sacrifice and gifts), japa and tapa (prayer and penance), dhyana and dharana (meditation and concentration). These
means I should compare with washing soda and soap. But bhakti is the water. Without water these other things are
useless; but even without these, water can cleanse. If we had them too, it would be as if sugar fell into milk by
accident.
If in yajna-yoga, dhyana and tapa the heart does not enter, how can purity of mind result? It is the involvement of
the heart that is bhakti. Bhakti is essential to all kinds of effort. It is the universal method. If a trained nurse,
attending on a patient, has not the bhavana, the mental attitude of service, how could it be true service? If a
bullock is strong, but is not inclined to draw the cart, he will hang his head and lie down or even overturn it in a
ditch. In work without heart, there is neither strength nor satisfaction.

Pure joy through bhakti
5. If we have bhakti, we can see the skill of the great artist, the brush in his hand. If once we taste the rare
sweetness of the stream at its source, all other pleasures become flat and insipid. A man who has tasted real
bananas would not be taken in by bananas of painted wood or clay, however beautiful. A man who tasted the
sweetness of a mountain stream would not care for syrups.
6. Once, some people said to a philosopher, "There is a festival of lamps in the city today. Let us go and see it." He
replied, "What, after all, is this festival lights? One lamp, then another, then, a third, and so on, a lakh, a million, a
crore - as many as you please. And that is your festival." In an arithmetical progression like 1+2+3 ... ... going on to
infinity, once we know the difference between one term and the next in the series, there is no need to write it all
down. These lamps are arranged one after the other; what is there in it to get so excited about?
But then, man likes this sort of pleasure. He squeezes a lemon, and mixes sugar and water with the juice, sips it and
smacks his lips and exclaims, "How delightful this drink is!" What else has the tongue to do, except to taste? We
blend all sorts of tastes - and its whole pleasure is in tasting them. When I was a boy, I once went to the cinema. I
took with me a piece of sacking in case I wanted to sleep. On the screen appeared dazzling pictures of fire, which
in a few minutes tired my eyes out. I went to sleep, asking my neighbour to wake me up when the show was over.
Instead of going out into the open air at night, and looking up at the moon and the stars in the sky, and enjoying the
holy peace o Nature why do people get cooped up in theatres and watch and applaud the dance of these fiery
figures? I never could understand this.
7. Why is man so joyless? The poor fellow finds some sort of pleasure in these lifeless figures. When there is no
joy in life, people go in for such artificial amusements. Once I heard drums beating in the neighborhood. I inquired
what it was for, and was told that a child has been born.
What is there so special about your having a child that you should announce it to the world with beat of drums? It
is not childish to celebrate a child-birth with all this dancing and singing and mirth? It is as if the world is
famished of joy. Just as in a famine people rush in a frenzy at the sight of grain, so we, hungry for joy, make a lot
of fuss when a child or a cinema or a circus arrives.
Is this true joy? Waves of music enter the ear and impinge on the mind; forms impinge on the mind through the
eyes. For these poor folk, all pleasure consists in these impacts. While one man sniffs in powered tobacco, another
rolls it into a beedi and inserts it into his mouth. And when the snuff or the smoke hits them they feel they have a
cart-load of pleasure. Their joy knows no bounds when they pick up a cigarette end.
Tolstoy says, "A man might even commit murder under the influence of cigarettes." It is a kind of intoxication.
Why does man lose himself in such pleasure? Because he does not know where his true joy lies. Man is beguiled by
shadows. He derives his pleasure only from his five senses. If he did not have the sense of sight, he would imagine
that the world offers only four kinds of pleasures.
If tomorrow, a man comes down from Mars with six senses, these poor people with only five would cry in sorrow,
"Compared to him, how despicable we are!" How can the full meaning of the universe be apprehended by these five
senses? Even among the objects of these five senses, man chooses only a few, and is lost in them. When the
donkey's braying reaches his ear, he says in disgust, "What an inauspicious noise!"
But is not the sight of you inauspicious to the donkey? If it hurts you, do you never hurt others, even granting that
the braying of the donkey is inauspicious? When I was studying in Baroda College, some celebrated European
musicians visited the College. No doubt, they sang marvelously, but since I was not used to that kind of music, I sat
there wondering, when I could escape this infliction. I decided that they did not deserve to pass.
And when our singers go abroad, they too would perhaps be 'esteemed' in this fashion. Some find joy in music,
others don't. Which means that this is not true joy, but illusory. Until we experience true joy, we shall toss up and

down on these deceptive pleasures. Till Asvatthama tasted genuine milk, he was satisfied with flour mixed in water.
Once we have seen the true nature of the universe, and tasted its joy, we shall find these other pleasures insipid.
8. The best way to discover this joy is bhakti. As we go alone this path, we shall discover the skill of the Lord.
When we reach this divine image, all other images disappear of themselves. Then you will not be attracted by
anything trivial. Then you will see that the whole world is filled with pure joy. Though there are hundreds of
sweetmeat shops, they are filled with the same sweets. Until the real thing comes to our hands, we are like
restless birds pecking at this and that. I was reading the Tulasi-Ramayan in the morning.
There was a cloud of moths surrounding the lamp. Just then, a lizard appeared. What interest had it in the
Ramayana? But the sight of the moths was sheer joy. As it was about to pounce on the insects, I moved my hand,
and it ran away. Even then its attention was concentrated on the moths. I asked myself, "Would you eat these
insects? Does your mouth water at the sight of them? No, my mouth did not water. What could the poor lizard
know of the joy that I was experiencing?
It could not taste the sweetness of the Ramayan. Our condition is not very different from that of the lizard. We
are intoxicated by a multitude of enjoyments. But when we find true joy, how sweet it would taste! The Lord has
shown us the way of bhakti; through this we can reach and taste the true joy.
Even bhakti born of desire has value
9. The Lord speaks of three kinds of devotees (bhakta) - (1) sakama bhakta, one who prays for something, (2) the
disinterested but partial bhakta, and (3) the jnani, the seer, or the perfect bhakta. The disinterested but partial
bhakta is of three kinds, - (1) The afflicted, (2) the seeker after knowledge and (3) the seeker of meaning and
purpose. These are the branches and twigs of the tree of bhakti.
What is meant of sakama bhakti, interested bhakti? It is approaching the Lord with some desire in the heart. I do
not despise this as a low form of bhakti. Many people render public service for name and fame. What is wrong in
that? Give them honor; you will do no harm by it. Because they receive honor they will get confirmed in service; and
then they will begin to find joy in their work. This desire for recognition, what does it mean ultimately? Through
recognition, one gets the faith that what one is doing is right.
One who has no inward means of deciding whether his service is good or bad, such a one accepts this external test.
When the mother pats the child on the back and says, "Well done, my child!", the child wants to help all the more.
The sakama bhakta too is like that. He could go straight to the Lord and say, "Give," asking for what he wants. The
habit of going to the Lord and asking Him for whatever one wants, is not common. It is something rare.
Jnanadev asked Namadev, "Will you go with me on a pilgrimage?" Namadev said, "But why?" Jnandev answered, "We
shall meet saints and good men." Namadev said, "Then I shall ask the Lord and come." Namadev went to the temple
and stood before the Lord. Tears flowed from his eyes. His eyes were fixed of the Lord. At last he asked, "Lord,
am I to go?" Jnanadev stood by his side all the time.
Would you call Namadev a mad man? There are lots of people who cry because their wives are away. But the bhakta
who goes to the Lord and weeps, even if it is only because he wants something, is rare. That he does not demand
what he ought to demand, only shows his ignorance; but just because of this, it would be wrong to regard bhakti as
something unworthy and to be rejected.
10. Women get up early in the morning and perform a number of rites, they light lamps, go round the tulasi plant
and so on. What for? So that after death they can get the grace of God. This faith may be simple, but for its sake
they observe prayer and fasting and other vows. Among people who live such devoted lives, great souls are born.
Ramatirtha was born in the line of Tulasidas. He was a scholar in the Persian language. Some one asked him, "How is
it that you, born in the line of Tulasidas, don't know Sanskrit?"
This went straight to his heart. Such is the effect of remembering one's ancestry! Impelled by it, he took up the
serious study of Sanskrit. We should not make light of the piety of women. Where these little drops of piety

gather, illustrious children are born. Therefore the Lord says, "I confirm the devotion even of the interested
bhakta. I will not confuse him. If he prays with true heart that his illness should go, I will confirm his will to health
and cure him of his illness.
No matter with what motive he comes to me, I will welcome him with love." Think of Dhruva. When he was refused
a place in his father's lap, his mother told him, "Ask the Lord for a place." Dhruva was absorbed in prayer, and the
Lord gave him a fixed abode. (He is the Pole Star). Even if the mind is not desireless, does it matter? The
important thing is whom one approaches, from whom one begs. There is greatness in begging from the Lord rather
than from the world.
11. Whatever the excuse, enter the temple of bhakti. Though in the beginning you enter it with a motive, you will
later become disinterested. Those who conduct Khadi exhibition plead with people, "Do come in and have a look.
Look at the fine texture, the bright colors, the beautiful patterns." Once they come in, they are impressed. Bhakti
too is like that. Once you enter its temple, you will discover its beauty and power for yourself.
When Dharmaraj reached at last the gates of heaven, there was only a dog with him. Bhima, Arjuna and the others
had fallen by the wayside. He was told, "You can come in, but the dog is not allowed to enter." Dharmaraj answered,
"If my dog cannot enter, neither will I." One who performs devoted service, even if it is only a dog, is superior to
those who are always thinking of themselves. The dog proved its superiority even to Bhima and Arjuna.
Even a worm that moves towards God is greater than the greatest of men who have not turned towards Him. In the
temple there are images of the tortoise and the bull, and everyone bows before the bull; why? Because it is not an
ordinary bull; it stays before the Lord. Even if it is dull, we cannot forget that it is the Lord's bull. It is greater
than the wisest of men. Even a dull creature, if it thinks of the Lord, earns the reverence of universe.
12. I was once traveling in a train. It was passing over a bridge across the Jamuna. A passenger sitting next to me
flung, with great enthusiasm, a coin into the river. There was a rationalist in the compartment who observed, "The
country is poverty-stricken, and on top of that, there are people who throw coins out of carriage windows." "You
have not understood why he does it," I said.
"The bhavana, the mental attitude with which he threw the coin, is worth at least two or three such coins, is it not?
If the money had been given for some good cause, it would, no doubt, have been better. We shall think about it
later. But then, he was moved to do this because of the feeling that this is not a mere river, but the Lord's
compassion flowing before us. Is there any room for this feeling in your Economics?
When his eyes saw one of his country's rivers, his heart melted. If you can assess in terms of money the value of
this feeling, then I shall know how to estimate your patriotism." Does love of country mean mere bread? If on
seeing one of the great rivers of one's country, the idea awakes in one's mind that one should immerse all one's
possessions in it, and dedicate them to it, how great is that love! All the wealth, those discs of gold and silver, the
pearls concreted in the oyster, the hardened coal which we call diamonds - they are indeed worthy of being thrown
into the waters.
Regard them as dust at the feet of the Lord. You may wonder what is the connection between a river and the feet
of the Lord. In your creation, has the Lord a place? The river is a combination of oxygen and hydrogen. The sun is a
kind of big gas-lamp. Why worship these? One should therefore bow low before this loaf of bread. But what is
there even in this loaf of bread? Even that, if you go into it, is a kind of white earth. Why does your mouth water
at the sight of it?
Here is the big bright sun just risen, here is the beautiful river flowing past - if you do not see God in them, where
can you see Him? Wordsworth laments "The Rainbow comes and goes,
And lovely is the Rose,
The sunshine is a glorious birth;

But yet I know, where'er I go,
That there hath past away a glory from the earth."
He says with great sorrow, "My heart used to leap up when I beheld a rainbow in the sky, it used to dance with the
daffodils, but why does it dance no more? Have I lost the sweetness of life and become a stone.
The truth is that even selfish bhakta, even superstitious reverence has high value. In the end a great power will
spring from them. No matter what sort of a person one is, if one goes once into the presence of the Lord, one
becomes worthy of honor. No matter what sort of wood is thrown into the fire, it will burn.
Devotion to the Lord, bhakti, is a wonderful means for attaining Him. He rejoices even in the devotion that is
accompanied by desire. In due course, such bhakti becomes desireless and tends towards perfection.
Disinterested bhakti - its varieties and fullness
13. We have seen the sakama bhakta, the devotee with a motive. We now turn to the nishkama bhakta, the
disinterested bhakta. Even of this bhakta there are two kinds - the partial and the whole. Of the partial devotee
again, there are three kinds. The first is the restless devotee. They seek the compassion of the Lord, sobbing and
crying and restless for Him, like Namadev.
They are eager, sorrow-stricken, desperate and agitated; thinking, "When shall I taste the nectar of the Lord's
love, when shall I embrace Him and fulfill my life's purpose, when shall I throw myself at His feet and be one of
the blessed?" They look in every action for truth, sincerity, yearning and love.
14. The second kind are the seekers of wisdom. There are not many such in our country today. Such a devotee of
truth would attempt again and again to climb Gaurishankar and perish in the attempt; he would go in search of the
North Pole and after writing down his discoveries on a piece of paper, and sealing it in a bottle which he leaves
floating on the waters, he dies. He would descend into the womb of a volcano. We Indians today are terribly afraid
of death.
We have no higher ideal in life than looking after our family. In the seeker after wisdom, there is an irrepressible
hunger for knowledge, an eagerness to know the truth. He will investigate the nature and qualities of everything.
As one by following the river comes at last to the sea, the seeker after knowledge reaches the Lord.
15. The third kind of bhakta seeks meaning and purpose (artha) in all things. "Artha" here does not mean money or
wealth, it only means welfare and happiness. The test he applies to every action, the touch-stone is, "how will
society benefit? Whatever he speaks, writes or does, he would make sure that is does good, not harm to the world.
He would never agree to anything that is useless or harmful. One who wishes for the world's welfare is indeed a
mahatma. His whole happiness is in the welfare of the world.
The first kind of bhakta, the afflicted one, looks at the whole world through eyes of love, the second kind, the
seeker of knowledge, through the eye of discovery, and the third, the seeker of meaning, from the point of view of
the world's welfare.
16. Though these three kinds of bhaktas are all desireless, still their approach is not integral. One reaches the
Lord through karma, the second through love, the third through knowledge. What remains is the perfect bhakta,
and he may be called the jnani-bhakta, the seer-saint. All that he sees he regards as forms of God.
In the ugly as in the handsome person, in the beggar as in the king, in men, women, animals and birds, everywhere
he sees only the pure presence of God. Tukaram prays, "Make my mind such, Oh Lord, that it sees men, women and
children, all as Narayan." We have in Hinduism such mad rites as the worship of the serpent, the elephant-headed
God, and trees; but we see greater madness in the seer-saints.

From the ant to the sun and the moon, in all that they see, everywhere, they behold the Lord, and in their hearts
beat the waves of the ocean of joy. "An endless, boundless bliss, a sea of joy, wells up." This divine and beautiful
vision, you may call an illusion if you like. But this illusion is a source of comfort, a fund of joy. In the majestic
ocean he sees the grandeur of the Lord, in Mother Cow he sees the mother-like tenderness of God, in the earth he
sees His patience, in the clear sky, His purity, in sun, moon and stars, His brightness and beauty.
In the flowers he sees His softness, and in evil men, the Lord who tests and tries us. Thus he practices the art of
seeing the one God at play everywhere and doing so, one day, the seer saint merges into the Lord.
ACHIEVING THE GOAL - THE YOGA OF CONSTANCY
Developing good samskaras
1. Human life is full of the play of samskaras - tendencies developed by repeated actions. Innumerable actions are
going on through us all the time. If we started counting them, we should never come to an end. Even if we take a
superficial look at the activities that go on in twenty-four hours, do you realize how huge the number would be?
Eating, drinking, sitting, sleeping, wandering, a little work, writing, talking, reading - besides these, how many
dreams, likes and dislikes, honor and dishonor, pain and pleasure in endless variety! And they all leave associations,
impacts, and build up tendencies in the mind. Hence, if someone asks me what life is, I should explain it as an
aggregate of samskaras.
2. Samskaras can be bad as well as good. And they both have their effects on human life. We cannot even recollect
the actions of our infancy, our childhood is like something written on a slate and rubbed off. The samskaras of a
former birth are like a writing completely rubbed out - so much so that one wonders whether there was a former
birth at all. When we do not remember our childhood even in this birth, why talk of previous births? Let apart
former births, let us think of this one. It is not as if only those things which we remember took place. Many are
the things done, and many the things known; but all this action and knowledge disappear, leaving only a trace of
samskara behind. If when we go to bed at night we try to recollect all our actions of the day, they don't all come
back. What actions do come back before our mind's eye? Only those which were vivid and distinct. If we had a
quarrel with someone, the impression lasts, for that was the day's earnings.
Important and distinct actions leave a deep impression on the mind; other actions fade away from memory. When
we write a diary, we mention only two or three outstanding events. When from these daily accounts we make up a
weekly summary, many event of these will drop out and only the most outstanding events remain. In the same way,
in a month or six months, in a year or five years, very few outstanding events alone remain in the memory and it is
these which form our samskara. Though innumerable actions take place, and endless knowledge is acquired, in the
end, the mind retains very little of it all.
All those various actions, all that varied knowledge came along, and did their work and disappeared. Out of all this
action only a few lasting samskara are left. And these form our capital. We conduct the business of life and
accumulate samskara. The merchant keeps his daily, monthly and annual accounts of income and expenditure, and at
the end arrives at the single figure of profit or loss; in the course of our lives, we enter on the credit side various
samskara, but at the end a single, firm clear, figure remains in the account. In the last moments of life the soul
begins to think of this final figure. As it looks back on all the achievements of a lifetime it realizes that the gains
are just two or three things.
This does not mean that all those actions and all that knowledge have been wasted. They have done their work, and
that is all. After the thousands of transaction, the net result is just a loss of five thousand rupees, or a profit of
ten thousand rupees. If there is a loss his heart sinks, and if there is a gain it bounds with joy.
3. We too are in the same position. If at the moment of death one wants something to eat, that is the conclusive
proof that all our lives we have trained ourselves but to please the palate. All that we have laid up in a long life is a
taste for eating and drinking - this is the vasana we carry over. If a mother at the moment of death thinks of her
child, we may take it that her strongest samskaras is love of her child; all her other innumerable actions, it is clear,
are secondary. In arithmetic we are familiar with problems in proper fractions; but however big the figures, when

we reduce them the result approximates to zero or one. In the same way, a single powerful samskara alone remains
at last as the essential thing.
This is the answer to the problem of life. The thought arising in the final moment is the fruit of the whole of one's
life. All the efforts of life should be guided by the idea that this final fruit should be full of sweetness, that the
last moment should be blissful. When the end is sweet, all else is sweet. We should fix the mind on this final
answer while solving the problems of life. Plan the whole of life with this ideal in view. In arriving at the answer to
a problem, we should keep the main issue in mind. We should direct the current of our lives in such a way that we
strengthen the samskara in which we wish to be firm at the last moment of our lives. Our whole attention should be
turned in that direction, day and night.
Remember the moment of death
4. In this Chapter it is stated that the thought that is uppermost at the moment of death prevails in the
succeeding birth. The soul sets out for the journey ahead, with this provision for the way. Taking today's earnings
with us after a night's sleep, we begin tomorrow. In the same way, with the accumulations of this life, after the
heavy sleep of death we resume the journey in the next birth. The end of this janma, life is the beginning of the
next. Walk through life having in mind the hour of death.
5. This is necessary also because we should conquer the fear of death and make it easy to cross over. There is a
story about Eknath. A man asked him, "Maharaj, your life is so simple and sinless. Why is our life utterly different?
You are angry with none, you quarrel with none, you hate none. How calm, how loving, how pure you are!" Eknath
replied, "Never mind me. I have found out something about you. In seven days from now, you will die." Who could
disbelieve Eknath's words? Death in seven days? Only 168 hours left. Oh, God that a calamity? He ran in haste to
his house. Nothing seemed clear to him. He was talking of disposing of his affairs and preparing for the end. Then
he fell ill. He lay flat on his bed. Six days passed. On the seventh day Eknath came to visit him. He greeted the
saint. Eknath inquired, "How are you?" He said, "All is over. Now I am going." Eknath asked further, "In these six
days, how many sins did you commit? And how many sinful evil thoughts came into your mind?" And the man who had
been awaiting death answered, "Lord, where was the time to think of thoughts? Death stood ever before my eyes."
Eknath said, "Now you know the reason, don't you, why our lives are absolutely sinless? When Death, the lion,
stands always before us, how can evil thoughts appear? Even to sin, one needs freedom from anxiety. Constantly
thinking of death is means of avoiding sin. If death is always staring him in the face, with what strength can man
commit sin?
6. But man tries to push away the thought of death. The French Philosopher Pascal says in his Pensees
("Thoughts"), "As men are not able to fight against death, misery and ignorance, they have taken it into heads, in
order to be happy, not to think of them at all. To be happy he would have to make himself immortal; but not being
able to do so, it has occurred to him to prevent himself from thinking of death."
"Death is always standing behind us. But man's effort to forget it goes on all the time. He never considers how to
live remembering death." Man does not like even the word, "death." If at dinner the word is uttered, we cut it
short saying, "How inauspicious!" But every step we take is a step that takes us towards death. Once we buy a
ticket to Bombay and sit in the train, though we keep sitting, the train will carry us to Bombay and leave us there.
At birth we take a ticket to the destination, death. Whether we sit still or run about, death is certain. Whether we
think of it or do not think of it, it will come. However uncertain all other things are, death is certain. As the sun
sets on the western hill, it has devoured a portion of our life.
Thus our days decrease, life tapers off, drop by drop the cup is emptied - but man takes no notice of all this.
Jnaneshwar says, "How curious!" He wonders how men could be so thoughtless. Man has become so frightened of
death that he cannot bear even the thought of it. He tries to keep off all thought of it. He sits down banding his
eyes. Soldiers going to the front play, dance, sing and smoke, to forget death. Pascal writes, "The only thing which
consoles us for our miseries is diversion, and yet this is the greatest of our miseries. For it is this which principally
hinders us from reflecting upon ourselves, and which makes us insensibly ruin ourselves. Diversion amuses us, and
leads us unconsciously to death."

"Though he sees death everywhere, the soldier loses himself in eating and drinking, singing and dancing, all in order
to forget it."
7. We are all like the soldier. Keeping a round laughing face, if it is withered, applying cream and powder, and dying
gray hair - all this man does. Death is dancing on our chest, but we try endlessly to put it out of our minds. We are
ready to talk about all other things, but not about death. You ask a boy who has just passed his Matriculation,
"What do you propose to do?" He replies, "Don't ask me now; I am only in my first year at College." If you ask him
again the following year, he would say, "Let me first finish the intermediate; there will be time enough to worry."
And so it goes on. But shouldn't one think in advance of the future? Should not one see the path in front clearly
before taking a step, to avoid pitfalls?
But shouldn't one think in advance of the future? Should not one see the path in front clearly before taking a step,
to avoid pitfalls? But the student shirks this task. What the poor fellow studies only serves to shed darkness on
the path ahead. So he takes good care not to ask the question what he could do in life. He may be surrounded by
darkness on all sides, but he cannot prevent what is bound to come; it will surely come about.
8. The Professor of Logic begins Deduction at College; "Man is mortal. Socrates is a man. Therefore, Socrates is
mortal." But why bring in Socrates; why not cite his own example? The Professor too is mortal. But he never says,
"All men are mortal. Therefore, I, the Professor, am mortal, and you the students too are mortal." He passes on to
Socrates the liability to die, for Socrates, luckily, is already dead. He is not likely now to stand up and protest. So
the teacher and the pupils establish the mortality of Socrates, and as for themselves, enter into a conspiracy of
silence. They fancy that they have warded off danger thus.
9. In this way, people are all the time making heroic efforts to forget death. But can one ever get rid of death by
such means? Only the other day, when my mother died, death stood before me. But there is a way of conquering
death by thinking fearlessly about it; but this way we dare not seek and find. A lion pursues a deer. The nimble
deer flees in fright, but soon it gets tired, and its strength fails. But Death in the form of the lion pursues it. The
state of the poor creature at the moment is indeed pitiable - it cannot even look at the lion. It buries its antlers
and face in the earth, and stands helpless, as if inviting the lion to come and devour it. We too dare not face death.
But although we try all tricks to run away from it, it is powerful enough to catch us at last by our neck.
10. And when death comes, man takes stock of his life's accounts. The stupid and lazy candidate dips his pen in the
inkpot and takes it out, but he cannot collect enough courage to blacken the paper. My fellow, do you mean to start
writing, or don't you? Surely, you don't expect Saraswati to take the pen out of your hand and write for you? Alas,
the three-hours are over; and he folds and submits the paper blank, or with a few lines scrawled on it. It does not
occur to him to try to understand the question and answer them. He wastes his time looking this way and that. Our
plight too is no different.
Therefore, remembering that death is the crown of life, we should constantly practice the means by which we can
make our last moments holy, pure and sweet. From now on we should think what we should do to impress on our
minds the most noble and beautiful samskaras. But who worries about acquiring good samskaras? Instead of this,
day and night, the training in bad ways goes on. We teach the tongue, the eyes and the ears to be greedy. We
should give a far different training to the chitta, the mind and heart. We should steep and dye the chitta in good
things. From the instant we discover an error, we should try and correct it. Once we know it is a mistake, how can
we go on doing it? The moment we discover a mistake, we are reborn. Then begins for us a new childhood, a new
dawn in life. Now we are truly awake. From now on we should examine our life day and night and walk warily. Else we
shall slip, and fall into bad habits again.
11. Many years ago I went on a visit to my old grandmother. She complained, "Vinya, I remember nothing these
days. I go to fetch the ghee pot, and then come back forgetting all about it." But she talked to me about some
trouble about a jewel which occurred fifty years earlier. She could not remember what happened five minutes
before, but something fifty years old was still fresh in her memory. How to account for this? She must have been
talking about the jewel affair again and again to a great many people - and therefore it had become a part of her
life. I said to myself, "Oh God, don't let my grandmother think of the jewel at the time of death!"

Be forever steeped in it
12. The thing we practice day and night sticks on us. Let us not be deceived by the story of Ajamila. He was to all
appearances a sinner, but hidden deep in his life was a stream of holiness. This came to the surface at the moment
of death. If you imagine that you would remember the name of Rama at the last moment, even if you had been a
sinner all your life, you are sure to be disappointed. You will have to train the mind aright from childhood. Take
constant care that good samskaras alone come to the mind. Don't say, "What does it matter whether one gets up at
four in the morning or at seven?" Talk of this sort is pointless. By letting the mind go as it pleases, you will defeat
yourself. Then you will never acquire good samskaras.
We have to accumulate wealth coin by coin; we must gather wisdom without wasting even a moment. Watch,
therefore, that only good samskaras take root in the mind. Any bad word that comes out of your mouth starts an
evil samskara. Every act is a stroke that chisels into shape the marble of our life. Even if the day passes well, evil
thoughts disturb our dreams. It is not as if only the affairs of the immediate past appear in dreams. So many
samskaras lie hidden in our minds behind the veil of forgetfulness. We cannot tell when they will come out into the
open. Therefore, we should be vigilant even over little things. A drowning man clutches even at a straw. And we are
drowning in the ocean of samskara. If we utter a good word, even that serves as a support to us. A good deed done
is never wasted; it will take you ashore. There should not be even the slightest trace of a bad samskara.
Strive always to keep the eyes pure, the ears closed against blame, the tongue engaged in good speech. If you are
thus careful, you will draw a good prize at the time of death. We will become the masters of life and death.
13. To create such good samskara let noble thoughts course through the mind. Let the hands be busy doing deeds
of goodness. Thoughts of God within, and the performance of svadharma, without the hands performing the karma
of service and in the mind, vikarma, the special action of the mind - these should go on constantly. Look at Gandhiji.
He spins on the charkha every day. He insists on our doing so too. But why spin every day? Is it not enough if we
spin now and then for the cloth we need? But then, this would only be a worldly or secular activity. Spinning daily is
spiritual; it indicates an inner desire to do what we can for our country. The thread we spin binds us day by day
with Daridranarayan (God in the form of the poor). It strengthens the good association, the samskara.
14. The doctor prescribes a medicine to be taken daily by us. But what if we drank it up all at once? It would be too
much of a good thing; anyhow, the purpose will not be fulfilled. By the continuous good effect of a course of
medicine, the faults in nature should be set right. The same holds good of life. We perform abhisheka (ceremonial
bathing) of Siva in a thin continuous stream.
I am fond of this example. I used to see this every day when I was a child. If you collect all the water used in
twenty-four hours, you might perhaps get two buckets. Why not pour the two bucketfuls all at once on Siva's
head? I got the answer to this even as a child. If we overturn the bucket in one breath, the karma would not bear
fruit. The flow of the water drop by drop is worship. The flow of our samskaras should be even and perpetual, like
this water of worship. In the morning, at noon and again in the evening, by day and by night, the same yesterday,
today and tomorrow; the same this year and the next, so too in janma after janma (birth after birth), the same in
life as in death, the divine stream of samskara made up of little drops of action, should flow uninterruptedly, all
through one's life.
It is only when this stream flows unbroken, that we can reach our goal and plant there the flag of victory. And this
stream of samskara should flow steadily in the direction. Otherwise it would be like water falling on a rock, and
scattered in many directions, without ever forming a river. On the contrary if all the water runs in one direction it
becomes a stream and gathering force as it goes down the mountains, it becomes a mighty river like the Ganga, and
mixes with the sea. The stream that runs in one direction reaches the sea, but the water that is scattered in many
directions soon dries up. The same is true of samskaras. If they come and go, of what use are they? It is only when
the pure stream of samskaras flows unbroken through life that the death that comes at its end will appear as a
bringer of bliss.
The traveler who does not stop on the way, escapes the delusions and temptations that beset him, and walk with
firm steps up the steep ascent, and reaches the mountain-top, and there throws down the burden on his back, and

enjoys the free air that blows there who but he can experience such joy? But the sun will not stay for the traveler
that dallies by the way.
War day and night
15. All this means that when the outward performance of svadharma and the purificatory interior action of
remembering God go on together, which the stream of karma without and vikarma within flows continuously, death
will be a bringer of joy. That is why the Lord says:
"Remember me at all times and fight."
"Tasmaat sarveshu kaleshu maamanusmara yuddhya cha."
"Steep yourself in Him always." Be forever absorbed in Him. When love for the Lord pervades you within and
without, and fills the whole of your life, only then will you find a constant joy in holy things. Then evil tendencies
will not appear before you. Beautiful and noble desires sprout in the heart : good deeds come naturally.
16. It is true that, when one always remembers the Lord, good deeds come naturally to one; but the Lord also
commands, "Be fighting all the time."
Tukaram says :"Night and day, within and without, in the heart and in the world, we are at war."
Within and without us spreads a boundless creation. With all these created things, the mind is at war without a
pause. We cannot say that, in this war, victory will be ours in every battle. He who wins in the end is the true
conqueror. It is the final decision that prevails. If on many occasions one earns honor, on many others one earns
dishonor. Disgrace or defeat is no cause for despondency. If after nineteen strokes, the stone does not break, but
it does at the twentieth stroke, have the first nineteen been wasted? Did they not make possible the success of
the twentieth?
17. So lose hope is to become an atheist. Have the faith that the Lord is our protector. To develop self-confidence
in the child, the mother allows it freedom to wander; but she would not let it fall. When she sees it about to fall,
she rushes to its help. The Lord keeps watch over you. He holds in His hand the string of your life's kite.
Sometimes He pulls the string taut, at others leaves it loose, but be sure the string is ever in His hand. At the
ghats of the Ganga, they teach swimming; a rope is tied to a tree on the bank and the other end to the waist of the
learner, before he is thrown into the water. But the teacher stands in the water ready to pull him up. The novice
sinks and rises up a few times, but in the end masters the art of swimming. In the same way, the Lord teaches us
the art of living.
The bright and dark paths
18. Therefore, if, with faith in the Lord, you fight day and night, in the thoughts, word and deed, the last moment
will be wonderfully perfect. Then all the divine powers will favor you. It is this lesson that is taught through images
at the end of this Chapter. Understand this image. If at the time of one's death, fire burns, the sun shines, the
moon waxes and the sun moves northward through the beautiful cloudless heavens, such a one merges in brahman.
But if smoke piles up, and it darkens within and the moon wanes and the sun moves southward through the dark
cloudy sky, such a one gets caught again in the vortex of birth and death.
19. Many people read this and get bewildered. If you want a holy death, you should seek the grace of fire, the sun,
the moon and the sky. Fire is the symbol of karma and yajna, of work and sacrifice. Even at the end, the flames of
yajna should keep burning. Justice Ranade used to say. "He is lucky who dies in the unremitting performance of
duty. I shall be happy if I die while reading, writing or working." This is what is meant by saying that "fire is
burning." If one is to keep working even at the moment of death, one must have the grace of fire (agni). That the
intellect shines bright and undimmed until the last moment, is by the sun's grace. By the grace of the moon pure
bhavanas (thoughts and feelings) wax and increase in the mind at the time of death.

The moon is the god of the mind, of bhavana. Like the moon of the bright fortnight, devotion, love, energy,
benevolence, compassion and such pure bhavanas should wax and grow perfect in the mind. The grace of the sky
means that the firmament of the mind is clear of the clouds of desire. Once Gandhiji said, "I keep shouting of the
charkha day and night. I consider the charkha a holy thing.
The moon is the god of the mind, of bhavana. Like the moon of the bright fortnight, devotion, love, energy,
benevolence, compassion and such pure bhavanas should wax and grow perfect in the mind. The grace of the sky
means that the firmament of the mind is clear of the clouds of desire. Once Gandhiji said, "I keep shouting of the
charkha day and night. I consider the charkha a holy thing. And yet, at the last moment, even this concern, this
vasana, should disappear. He who inspired me with this love of the charkha, can very well look after it Himself. The
charkha has now been taken up by many good people. I must now give up worrying about the charkha and get ready
to join the Lord." The northward journey means that the heart should be free of the clouds of attachment.
20. When the hands perform acts of service till the last breath, the full moon of bhavana shines brightly, the
mind's sky is free from desire, and the intellect is bright and keen - when a man dies in this state, we may take it
that he has merged in the Lord. In order to make such an auspicious ending, one must watch day and night and wage
skillful war. Not even for an instant should an evil tendency be permitted in the mind. And in order to gain the
strength necessary for this, one should pray constantly to the Lord. Again and again, one should remember His
name and meditate on His truth.
THE KINGLY ART OF SERVICE TO HUMANITY - THE YOGA OF DEDICATION
Knowledge through direct experience
1. These talks of mine are not meant to each others. No doubt, those who want to profit from them may surely do
so. For my part, when I talk on the Gita, I regard it - as Ramanaama. As I go on speaking, it is to me the same
experience as uttering the names of God.
2. Between what I have been saying now and the Ninth Chapter there is a close connection. In this Chapter is
described the rare power of the name of God. This chapter is placed at the center of the Gita, as the Gita itself is
at the center of the Mahabharata. For many reasons, this Chapter has been considered holy. It is said Jnandev, in
his final samadhi (trance), recited this Chapter and breathed his last. At the very thought of this Chapter, tears
come to my eyes, and my heart is full.
How great is the gift, Vyasadeva has given to us! This is his gift not to India alone, but to all mankind. What the
Lord taught to Arjuna could not be expressed in words. But Vyasa, moved by compassion, put it into Sanskrit
speech; he clothed in words the ineffable secret.
3. At the beginning of this Chapter, the Lord says,
"Raajavidyaa raajaguhyam pavitram idam uttamam."
"This is the supreme knowledge, the supreme secret, the highest and the purest."
And this unique knowledge is something to be experienced directly. The Lord says it is "pratyakshaavagama,"
knowledge to be realized by oneself - a knowledge which is beyond words, but which has been tested on the
touchstone of direct experience. That is why it is sweet, Tulasidas has said :"Who knows who will go to Yama's abode, and who to the higher world, the home of the gods?"
To Tulasi it seems best to live on this earth as Rama's slave.
It is the sweetness of living in the service of Rama that is found in this Chapter. What can be experienced in this
body, seen directly with these eyes, enjoyed here and now in this life, is described here. When we eat sugar, its
sweetness is directly experienced. The sweetness of living as Rama's servant is experienced in the same direct
manner here.

The supreme knowledge which reveals to us the sweetness in this mortal life is the subject of this Chapter. Though
this knowledge is a hidden secret, the Lord opens it out for all to understand with ease.

The easy way
4. The Gita is the essence of the Vedic dharma, that is, the way of life derived from the Vedas. The Vedas are
considered to be older than all the other Scriptures in the world. That is why enthusiasts call them "anaadi,"
without beginning. Thus the Vedas are accorded special reverence. Even if we approach them from the historical
point of view, they are the most ancient expression of the earliest experiences of our race. These literary records
are more valuable than copper-plates, stone inscriptions, coins, vessels and the remains of the animals. The earliest
historical evidence in the world is provided by the Vedas.
The dharma which was but a seed in the Vedas grew and became a tree and yielded at last the sweet fruit of the
Gita. What else but the fruit of the tree can we eat? It is only when the tree yields fruit that we get something to
eat. The Gita is the twice-distilled essence of the Vedic dharma.
5. In this Vedic dharma, which has grown from the most ancient times, are mentioned various yogas and yajnas,
rites and rituals, many penances and practices. These are not useless, but require a fitness in the doer. To acquire
this was not easy for everyone. Who is to climb up the tall coconut tree, pluck the fruit, remove the fiber, break it
and get at the kernel?
However hungry I may be, what use is the fruit up there in the tree to me? I look up at the coconut and the
coconut looks down at me. How can it quench the fire of my hunger, until it reaches my hands? These various rites
were filled with subtle ideas. How could the common folk comprehend them? There is no moksha (liberation) except
through the Vedic path; but few had the fitness to study the Vedas. What happens to the others, then?
6. Hence the saints, filled with compassion, came forward saying, "Come, we shall take out the essence of the
Vedas. We shall give it to the world in a simple form." Tukaram sings, "There are innumerable things in the Vedas;
but their substance is only this."
What is that substance? The Name of the Lord. The Name of the Lord is the essence of the Vedas. It is certain
that through Ramanaama one can attain moksha, which means that moksha has become easy for women, children,
shudras, vaishyas, the rustic and the poor, the weak, the sick and the lame, indeed for everyone.
The moksha that lay locked up in the Vedas as in strong box, the Lord has brought out and placed at the crossroad. What a direct and easy way to moksha! One's ordinary life, what one does as svadharma, one's acts of
service, why not make this itself a yajna, a sacrifice? Where is the need for any other sacrifice, any yogas or
yajnas? Regard as a yajna, and continue to perform, the ordinary work of service that you do every day.
7. This is the royal road.
"Yan aasihaaya naro raajan na pramaadyeta karhichit dhaavan nimiilya vaa netre na skhalet na patet iha."
"On which, even if you run with closed eyes, there is no danger of stumbling or falling."
The other path is like a razor's edge, sharp and difficult to traverse - "kshurasya dhaaraa nishitaa duratyayaa;"
the Vedic way is sharper and more perilous than the edge of a sword. How much easier is the way of the service to
Rama. The engineer makes the gradient so gentle that we reach the top almost unaware that we are climbing. This
is the merit of the royal road too. In whatever work the man is engaged, through that natural action alone he is
able to reach the Supreme - such is this method.
8. Does the Lord hide Himself somewhere, in some cave or crevice, in some river or in some heaven? Diamonds and
rubies, gold and silver, lie hidden in the bowels of the earth, pearls and corals in the depth of the sea. But is this
gem, the Lord, hidden somewhere? Have we to dig Him up? Why, He stands all the time before all of us. Everyone
here is a manifestation of the Lord. The Lord says, "Do not dishonor the person of the Lord manifest in human

form, my brother." It is the Lord that appears as all things moving and unmoving. Where is the need for artificial
aids to seek and find Him? The way is straight and easy.
Relate to the Lord whatever service you perform; that is enough. Become Rama's servant. No doubt, those arduous
Vedic processes, the yajna, the svaha, the svadha, the shraaddha, the tarpana (Vedic rituals), will take us towards
moksha. But they raise the problem of the fit and the unfit. We need none of it. Do just this much. Whatever you
do, dedicate to the Lord. Relate to Him every act of yours. This is what the Ninth Chapter teaches. Hence it is
most dear to bhaktas (devotees).
No question of fitness
9. This most charming part of Krishna's life is his childhood. It is Bala-Krishna, the young Krishna, that we cherish
in our hearts and worship. He goes out with other cowherd boys grazing cattle; he eats and laughs and plays with
them. When they set out to worship Indra, he told them, "Who has seen Indra? How has he helped us? But this
Govardhan hill stands here before our eyes. Our cattle graze on its slopes. Streams flow from it. Let us, therefore,
worship it." Such things he taught them. To his cowherd companions, to the gopis with whom he laughed and talked,
to the cows and calves he rejoiced in, to them all he opened the door of moksha.
The Lord Krishna has shown us by his own experience this easy way. He moved with cows and calves in his
childhood, with horses when he grew up. On hearing the music of his flute the cows went into ecstasy; the horses
thrilled to the touch of his hand as he stroked them. The cows and calves, the chariot-horses, were filled with
Krishna, became one with Him. Even creatures of lower species, attained moksha. Sri Krishna made it clear that not
only men but animals and birds also had the right to moksha. He proved it in practice in His life.
10. Krishna's experience was Vyasa's too. Krishna and Vyasa are one. The essence of their lives is the same.
Moksha does not depend upon one's learning or performance of rites. All it needs is straight and simple bhakti.
While learned men who say "I, I," are left behind, innocent and devout women go forward. When the mind is pure
and the heart full of simplicity and holiness, moksha is not difficult to attain. There is a Chapter in the
Mahabharata describing the conversation between Janaka and Sulabha. Vyasa creates a situation where Janaka
approaches a woman to learn wisdom from her.
You may go on discussing whether women have the right to study the Vedas; but here we see, before our eyes,
Sulabha teaching divine wisdom to king Janaka. She is an ordinary woman, and he an emperor, and a profound
scholar. But the wise Janaka had not attained moksha. And so Vyasa sends hem to fall at the feet of Sulabha. The
story of the vaishya (merchant) Tulaadhar is similar. The brahmin Jaajali goes to him in search of wisdom.
Tulaadhar tells him, "All my wisdom consists in holding the scale even." Similar too, Vyaadha is the story of the
hunter. He killed animals and sold meat. That was how he served society. An arrogant brahmin ascetic was asked by
his guru to approach the hunter and learn wisdom from him. The brahmin wondered, "What can this butcher teach
me?" Still he went to him and saw him cutting the meat, washing it and displaying it for sale.
He said to the brahmin, "Look, I am doing this work, making it an act of dharma as well as I can. I pour all my soul
into this work, and serve my parents." In the form of this hunter Vyasadeva puts before us an ideal man.
11. The purpose of introducing into the Mahabharata these stories about a woman, a vaisya and a shudra is to make
it clear that the doors of moksha are open to all. It is this truth that is taught in the Ninth Chapter. It sets the
seal of approval on these stories. The joy of living in Rama's service was found in the hunter's life. Tukaram was a
lover of ahimsa but he describes in appreciating terms the story of Sajan, the butcher, who found moksha by being
a butcher. Tukaram asks elsewhere, "Lord, what salvation is there for those who kill animals?"
But he writes, "With the butcher Sajan He sells meat," and thus says that the Lord was a friend and helper of the
butcher. The Lord who honored Narsi Mehta's cheque, who carried water for Eknath's household, who repaid the
amount to the Government treasury on behalf of Damaji, who helped Janabai, very dear to Maharashtrians, in
pounding and grinding grain, that same Lord also helped the butcher Sajan with the same love, says Tukaram. The
moral is that we should surrender all our actions to the Lord. If the action is filled with pure bhavana, with the
attitude of service, it becomes a yajna.

Dedicate to the Lord the fruit of action
12. It is this important truth which is described in the Ninth Chapter, where karma-yoga and bhakti-yoga are
beautifully blended. Karma-yoga means doing the action, but renouncing the fruit. Act with such skill that the
fragrance of the fruit, the desire for reward, does not touch the mind. It is like planting a walnut tree. The walnut
tree takes twenty-five years to yield fruit. The man who plants it rarely gets the chance of eating, in his own
lifetime, the fruit of the tree he planted. And yet he has to plant and water and look after the tree lovingly.
Karma-yoga means planting and minding the tree but not desiring the fruit. What is bhakti-yoga?
It means becoming one with the Lord through devotion. In raja-yoga, both karma and bhakti are combined. Rajayoga has been explained by different people in different ways. But I should describe it briefly as a beautiful
combination of karma-yoga and bhakti-yoga. Let us perform action, and not throw away the fruit but dedicate it to
God. To throw away the fruit would be to reject it, but dedication is different. What a lovely arrangement! There
is a wonderful sweetness in it. Renouncing the fruit does not mean that no one would get the benefit of it. It will
reach someone or the other, someone or other will surely receive it.
Then the question may arise, whether he who gets the benefit deserves it. If a beggar comes to our door, we say,
"You are strong and sturdy. Why should you beg? Get away." We consider whether it is right or wrong for him to
beg. The poor fellow is ashamed and goes away. There is no trace of fellow-feeling in our heart. Further, how are
we to determine the desires of the man who begs?
13. Once in my childhood, I expressed such a doubt to my mother, and the answer she gave me then is still ringing
in my ears. I told her, "This beggar is hale and hearty. If we give him alms, we should be only encouraging laziness
and bad habits." And I went on to quote the words from the Gita, "dese kaale cha paatre cha," (in the right place,
at the right time, to the deserving person). She answered, "He who has come to beg is none else than the Lord.
Now you may decide whether he is fit to receive your alms. Or would you say that the Lord is not fit? What right
have you and I to judge of fitness? I see no need for all this questioning. To me he is the Lord." And to this day, I
do not know any argument that will meet this answer.
I consider fitness when it is a question of feeding another, but when it comes to filling my own stomach, the
thought of fitness doesn't occur to me!
The man who comes to our door for food, why should we look on him as just a beggar? Why should I not see that,
when I give something to someone, I am giving it to God.
14. Raja-yoga says, "The benefit of your karma goes to someone, doesn't it? If so, give it over to Lord, dedicate it
to Him." Raja-yoga points out the proper recipient. There is no negative action of renouncing the fruit in raja-yoga,
and since everything is dedicated to the Lord, the question of fitness or unfitness is eliminated. The gift that is
offered to the Lord is always pure. Even if there are impurities in your action, it will become pure when it reaches
His hands. However hard we try to make our actions perfect, there will still be some shortcomings. Nevertheless,
let us act with the utmost possible purity. The intellect is God's gift. It is our duty to use it in as pure form as
possible. It would be a sin not to do so. So we should think of fitness and unfitness; but the decision becomes easy
when you are devoted to the Lord.
15. For attaining purity of mind, we should give away the fruit. Dedicate to the Lord every action as it takes shape.
As actions take shape before our eyes, dedicate them then and there to the Lord and be content
We do not give up the fruit, we only give it over to the Lord. Why only the fruit, event the vasanas, the tendencies
that arise in the mind, and the deformations like lust and anger - place them all at the feet of the Lord, and be
free from care.
"My lust and my anger, I surrender to Vitthal."
Here there is no need to torture oneself in the fire of self-control. Surrender promptly and find freedom. No
holding down or cutting off.

"If the sickness can be cured by milk and sugar, why drink the bitter juice of neem."
16. The senses also are means for our use. Dedicate them to the Lord. People complain that the ears do not
listen to such good advice. Are we then to close our ears? No, we should keep them open, but only to stories
of Hari. It is difficult to keep the ears from hearing. But it is very easy, it is pleasant and profitable, to
make them listen to stories of Hari. Give your ears to Rama. Use your mouth to utter Rama's name. The
senses are not enemies. They are our friends. Their power for good is boundless. Therefore, the best and
noblest way to use every one of the senses is with the intellect surrendered to the Lord. This is called rajayoga. No need for special activity
17. It is not as if we should dedicate to the Lord only particular kinds of action. We should dedicate to him all our
action as such. With what love Rama accepted the fruit offered by Sabari! One need not go and sit in a cave to
worship God. Whatever action you perform, wherever you may perform it, surrender it to God. The mother waiting
on her child waits on God. When she bathes her child, she is performing Rudra-abhisheka for God. The mother,
regarding the child as a gift from God, should tend it with devotion. How tenderly did Kausalya care for Rama and
Yasoda for Krishna. Suka, Valmiki and Tulasidas consider themselves lucky in describing this tenderness and do it
with unbounded enthusiasm.
The mother's act of tender care is indeed noble. What greater fortune could come to her than serving the image
of the Lord, her child? When we serve each other, if only we did it with this attitude, how could our actions be
transformed! We should have the bhavana that whatever work comes to us is the service of the Lord Himself.
18. The farmer serves his bullock. Is the bullock to be despised? No, the bull that Vamadeva, in the Vedas,
describes as pervading the universe in the form of shakti (energy), is present in the farmer's bullock too.
"chatvaari shringaa trayo asya paadaa
dve shiirshe sapta hastaaso asya
tridhaa baddho vrishabho roraviiti
maho devo martyaam aavivesha."
"The bull has four horns, three legs, two heads and seven hands is bound in three places and, becoming mighty in
splendor, pervades all moral things. It is this same bull, that roars and fills the universe, which the farmer
worships." The commentators have interpreted this passage in a variety of ways. And this bullock too is wonderful!
The bull that roars in the heavens and pours down the rains is present in the farmer's bullock, which drops down
dung and urine to fertilize the field. If a farmer serves his cattle with this noble bhavana, even this ordinary work
of his becomes worship of the Lord.
19. In the same way, the mistress of the household tries to feed and please the family by keeping the kitchen
clean, lighting the fire and preparing pure and wholesome food, and all these acts of hers are yajna, sacrificial
action. Is this mere oven, is it not sacrificial fire kindled by the mother? How pure and holy the food will be when
it cooked with the bhavana of pleasing the Lord - just think of it. If the grihalakshmi ("the goddess of the
household") is inspired by such noble thoughts and feelings, we should think of her as belonging to the race of
rishipatnis (the wives of the rishis) described in the Bhagavata. While ever so many mothers have attained moksha
through service, scholars and learned men who are thinking of themselves all the time are cast in corners uncared
for.

All life can be filled with God
20. The moments of our daily life may appear commonplace, but in reality they are not so, they carry enormous
significance. All one's life is a great yajna-karma, a continual sacrificial performance. What is sleep? It is a kind of
samadhi, an experience of oneness. If we surrender all our enjoyments to the Lord before we fall asleep, what is
sleep but samadhi? There is a custom among us of reciting the hymns of purushasukta while taking a bath. Now
what is the connection between the purushasukta and a bath? You will surely see if you try. What is the connection
between the virat purusha, the Cosmic Person, with his thousand hands and thousand eyes and this, my bath?

The connection is that, in the pitcher of water that you pour down on your head, there are thousands of drops.
Those drops wash your head - they rid you of your sins. It is like the blessing of the Lord showered on your head.
The thousand hands of the Lord are pouring a thousand streams on your head. Through these drops the Lord
himself is purifying your mind and heart. If you pour this divine bhavana into this act, the bath will assume a new
quality and acquire a boundless power.
21. Any action performed with this bhavana, that is, feeling that it is God's work, becomes sacrament; this has
been tasted by experience. Assume for a while that a visitor to your house is the Lord Himself. When, in the
ordinary course, a distinguished guest is expected in our house, how we clean and polish and what a grand feast do
we prepare! But if we think that the Lord Himself is the guest, would it not make a vast difference to our feelings?
Kabir was busy at his loom; he was absorbed in his work and sang;
"jhiini jhiini bini chadariya"
He forgot himself as if he were weaving a chaddar for the Lord. The rishi of the Rigveda says :vastreva bhadraa sukritaa
I offer this, my hymn, like a garment woven well by lovely hands to the Lord. The poet composes his songs for the
Lord's sake. And he who spins and weaves cloth, he too does it for the Lord's sake. Here is a thought to touch the
heart, to purify, and exhilarate. Once this bhavana comes into our life, how flawless would our days become! When
the light flashes in darkness, does not the darkness disappear instantaneously? Is it destroyed gradually?
No, in one instant the whole thing within and without is transformed. In the same way, the moment we relate every
action to the Lord, at once, a wonderful new energy flows into our life. Every action becomes pure. We are filled
with enthusiasm. Where is the zest in our life today? We are alive only because we are not yet dead. There is a
dearth of enthusiasm all round. Life is dark, ugly and full of sorrow. But, just for a while, let the mind consider that
all our actions are for the sake of the Lord. Then we will realize how full of beauty and value our lives become.
22. There is no doubt that a single name of God transforms life at once. Don't say what good can the word "Rama"
do. Just try saying it and see what happens. In the evening, after his day's work, the farmer returns home. On the
way he meets a traveler, and says to him:
"The night is falling, Narayana; come home with me." As the farmer says, "Brother traveler, Oh Narayana, stop for
a while. It is night, Lord, come to my house." His word changes the traveler, does it not? Even if he is a dacoit or a
robber, he is transformed into a friend. This conversion is due to bhavana! Such is the power of bhavana to
transform all things.
Bhavana is the substance of life. A strange lad of twenty comes to the house. The father gives him his daughter in
marriage. The old man bows to the youngster - what does this mean? How holy is the act of giving away a daughter!
He who accepts the gift, is regarded as God himself. This bhavana which we take to a son-in-law, let us carry it
further and higher.
23. Some may object, "What do we gain by making these false suppositions?" But I would say, "Don't start with
such talk of truth and falsehood. Practice it first, and gain experience of it; then you will know what is true and
what is false." If at the marriage ceremony you do not merely say in words, but feel at heart, that the bridegroom
is the Lord Himself, you will realize what a great difference this makes. As a result of this holy bhavana (mental
attitude), the object will change so much that its latter form will differ from its earlier as heaven from earth. The
undeserving becomes deserving, and the evil, good. Was it not in this way that Balya (Valmiki) the hunter was
converted?
There in the forest, the sage Narada's fingers dance on the strings of the vina, he sings the name of Narayana;
the robber Balya runs towards him to kill him. Even then, he is calm and undisturbed the sage looks on him with
eyes full of love. Never till then had Balya seen such a thing. He had seen only two kinds of animals - one which fled
from his bow and arrow and another which turned round on him and attacked him. But Narada neither fled nor
flared up at sight of him, but stood there at peace. Balya's bow and arrow stood still. Narada would neither raise

his brow nor shut his eyes. The music went on sweetly as before. He asked the robber, "Why does your arrow
stop?" Balya answered, "At the sight of your peace." Narada had transformed Balya. Was the change true or false?
24. Who is to decide that a man is bad? Even if a really bad person appears before you, think that he is Lord
Himself. Even the villain will become a saint. Then, are we to imagine falsely? But I say, who can be certain that the
man is wicked? Some say, "Good people, being good themselves, see nothing but goodness around them." But in fact,
this is not true. Should the world then accept as true only what you see, and nothing else? Are we then to suppose
that it is only the bad people, who can truly understand the world? Why not say that there is nothing wrong with
creation, but it appears bad to you because of badness in you? Look, creation is but a mirror.
What you are and what you bring to this mirror, the image of this you see in the world. It is the eyes of the
beholder that determines the form of the world. Therefore, approach all creation with the feeling that it is good,
that it is pure. Carry the same bhavana to all your ordinary actions. Then you will see a miraculous change. This is
what the Lord means us to understand when He says :"yatkaroshi yadashnnasi yajjuhoshi dadaasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kurushva madarpanam."
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever rites or austerities you perform, whatever you give, do it, O
son of Kunti, as an offering to me.
What you do, such as it is, dedicate it all to the Lord.
25. When I was a child, my mother used to tell me a story. It is a funny little story, but it contains a profound
secret. There was a lady who resolved that everything she did should be offered to Lord Krishna. After cleaning
the oven in the kitchen with a mixture of clay and cowdung, she made what was left into a ball and threw it out,
saying "Krishnaarpanamastu" - "May Krishna accept it." What happened was that the ball of cowdung would rise into
the air and, flying into the temple, stick on the face of the image of the Lord. The priest, poor fellow, got tired
cleaning up the image. He did not know what to do. At last he discovered that this was all due to the lady.
As long as the lady was alive, the image could not be kept clean. One day the lady fell sick. She was about to die.
She dedicated her death also to Krishna. The image in the temple fell to pieces. The heavenly chariot came to
fetch her - but this too she dedicated to Krishna. The chariot dashed against the temple and was smashed up. Even
heaven is reduced to nothing before the thought of Krishna.
26. The meaning of it all is that whatever actions we do, whether good or bad, a new dimension of power enters into
them, the moment we surrender them to the Lord. The grains of maize are reddish yellow in color but when maize
is parched in sand, what good popcorn it becomes!
What a difference between the dainty popcorn, white and soft, and the hard grain! But there is no doubt that the
one has become the other, and the change is due to the fire. Likewise, if you grind this hard grain in mill, it
becomes soft flour. As contact with fire makes it flowerlike, and grinding in the mill makes it into soft flour, so
even the smallest actions are transformed when they are passed through the process of dedication to God. By this
bhavana, the feeling, their value is raised. Do not despise the common gudel flower, the bel leaf, the tender tulasi
leaf and dub grass "Tuka says, by association with Vitthal, sweetness comes to it."
Associate everything with the Lord, and then taste it afresh. Where is the spice to equal Rama? Add this divine
masala (sauce) to everything you do, so it will become beautiful and tasty.
27. During the evening worship at the temple, when the smoke of incense rises, lamps are lit, and the burning
camphor is waved before the image, we feel indeed the presence of the Lord before our eyes. All day He is awake,
and now it is time for Him to go to sleep. The devotees put Him to sleep with the lullaby -

"Sweetly sleep, my Gopala my sweet one, sleep."
A sceptic asks, "Does your God sleep too?" My dear man, what does the God not do? If the Lord does not sleep and
wake, can the stone then sleep and wake? My friend, it is the Lord that sleeps and wakes, it is He that eats and
drinks. As the day dawns, Tulasidas wakes the Lord, sings and prays to the Lord.
"Wake up. O Lord of the Raghus, my child; the birds are singing in the woods."
Tulasidas looks on all his brothers and sisters, all the men and women in the world, as Ramachandra Himself and
says to them, "My Ramas, my kings arise." What a beautiful idea! For a contrast, let us take a hostel where they
wake up the boys, shouting, "Get up, you sleepy-heads." Is this rude shouting in harmony with the auspicious
morning hours? Young Rama is asleep in Vishwamitra's ashram. And this is how, according to Valmiki, the teacher
awakens the pupil.
"Raama iti madhuraam vaaniim visvaamitra abbyabhaashata
Uttishtha narashaarduula puurvaa sandhyaa pravartate."
Thus, in a sweet voice, Vishvamitra says, "Rama, my child, the sky is brightening in the east, get up, O tiger among
men." What a difference between the ashrama and the modern hostel?
Why should the poor sleeping lad feel it is his foe through seven births that wakes him up? First whisper, then
speak a little louder, but never be rough or rude. If he does not wake up, try again after ten minutes. If he does
not get up in time today, be sure he will do so tomorrow. Sing to him songs of sunrise, songs of praise. You may
think that waking up a sleeper is an ordinary job, but we can fill even that with poetry, with feeling and beauty. We
should wake him up as if he were God asleep. Yes, we should be gentle in rousing the image of God. Waking up a
sleeper is also an art.
28. Inform all your actions with this idea. Indeed, this idea is essential to teaching. What are children but images
of God? The teacher should be filled with the bhavana that he is rendering service to these gods. If he did, he
would never bawl out at them, "Get out! Stand up for an hour! Hold out your hand! How dirty your clothes are! Go
and clean your nose!" He would, instead, gently wipe the child's nose, he would wash and mend his clothes. If the
teacher does so, what a change there will be! Whoever heard of any good coming out of beating and cruelty?
Students too should regard their teachers with the same divine bhavana. Teachers should look on their pupils as
gods, and so too should the pupils regard their teachers. If this mutual bhavana is established, how brightly would
knowledge shine! Indeed, the boys are the Lord, and so is the teacher! If only the pupils feel, "This is not just a
school master, this is Lord Shiva Himself, we are drinking in the nectar of His teaching, let us enlighten our
understanding up as a service to Him," we can well imagine how they would behave towards him.
If this mutual bhavana is established, how brightly would knowledge shine! Indeed, the boys are the Lord, and so is
the teacher! If only the pupils feel, "This is not just a school master, this is Lord Shiva Himself, we are drinking in
the nectar of His teaching, let us enlighten our understanding up as a service to Him," we can well imagine how they
would behave towards him.
No fear of sin
29. Once the bhavana settles in the mind that the Lord is a shining presence everywhere, the ethics of our mutual
relations will spring of its own accord in the heart. There is no need to look for it in books. Then all defects will
vanish, sin will flee, and the darkness of evil disappears.
Tukaram has said :"Be free and bold, take now the divine name of Vitthal,
He will come to you, and sin will cease to be."
Well, then, you are free to sin if you wish! I shall see whether you get tired of sinning first or Ramanaama get
tired of destroying your sins. Which is the sin powerful enough to stand against the Lord's name? "Sin as much as
you like" - a charter of freedom is given to you. Let the Lord's name and your sins fight it out. My dear man, the

name has the power to reduce the ashes in a moment all the sins not merely of the present life, but of countless
janmas. No matter how ancient the darkness is in a cave, it flees when a match a stuck. The darkness becomes
light. The older the sin, the more quickly it is destroyed, because it is old and must perish.
It is old fuel that burns to ashes soon.
30. No sin can stand near Ramanaama. Do not children say that ghosts vanish when you say 'Rama'? When I was
young, we used to challenge each other to go to the burning ground at dead of night and drive in a peg there. There
would be snakes and thorns on the way, and darkness all round, but nothing daunted me. No ghost ever appeared.
Ghosts are creations of the mind, why then would we see them? Where did the boy of ten gain the courage to visit
the cremation ground? From Ramanaama. This is the glory of the Lord who is the image of truth. If you have the
bhavana that the Lord is always by your side, then you, His servant, will know no fear even if the whole world turns
upside down.
Which demon can eat you up? The demon may eat and digest your body, but not the truth. There is no power on
earth that can destroy truth. Not for a moment can sin stand before the name of the Lord. Therefore turn your
heart towards God. Attain His grace. Dedicate all actions to Him. Become altogether His. If you strengthen the
bhavana that all actions should be offered up to the Lord, this sordid life will become divine, the commonplace will
become beautiful.
Little but sweet
31. 'Patram pushpam phalam toyam," a leaf, a flower, a fruit, a little water, whatever it is, bhakti makes the
offering complete. The question is not how much to give, but with what bhavana. Once I was talking to a professor
about a problem in teaching. We happened to differ. Finally he said, "Sir, I've been at this job for eighteen years."
When, instead of convincing me, he cited his long experience, I said in fun, "Sir, if for eighteen years a bullock is
yoked to an oil mill, does it become an engineer?" It is one thing to go round and round blindly like a bullock and
quite another to understand the science of engineering. A man may carry for years the burden of teaching and yet
not understand the art of teaching.
The knowledge that a scientist can acquire in six months, a porter cannot in eighteen years. The professor might
have grown gray teaching, but that proves nothing. So also, there is no value in the quantity of the stuff you pile up
before the Lord. There, the question is not about size or shape or price, but only about the bhavana; not what or
how much we offer, but how, in what spirit, we offer it. There are only 700 slokas in the Gita; there are other
works with as many as 10,000. But we cannot say that because a thing is big, it therefore better. What we should
look for is the power, the energy it has. The number of action in life is not important. Even a single action
performed in a spirit of dedication to the Lord will bring us the fullness of experience.
Sometimes in one holy moment an experience comes to us which in the ordinary course we cannot acquire in a
stretch of years.
32. The essence of the matter is that, if we give over to the Lord all our actions, then life acquires strength and
skill from this, and moksha is within our grasp. To perform action, without renouncing the fruit, to surrender it to
the Lord, this is raja-yoga. This takes us a step beyond karma-yoga. Karma-yoga says, "Perform action. Renounce
the fruit; do not desire it." And there it stops. Raja-yoga says, "Do not give up the fruit, but surrender all your
actions to the Lord.
They are flowers; they are means to carry you heavenward; offer them to the image of the Lord. With action on
the side and devotion on the other, combining both karma and bhakti, make your life more and more beautiful.
Do not renounce the fruits. They are not to be thrown away, but dedicated to the Lord." The fruit that is cut off
from action in karma-yoga is reunited with the raja-yoga. When you sow the seed, you do not throw it away. What
you so, be it ever so little, will increase and yield infinite fruit. What you throw away is wholly lost. The action
dedicated to the Lord is like a seed sown. It fills our life with endless joy and holiness.

CONTEMPLATION OF THE DIVINE GLORY The first half of the Gita : a retrospect
1. Friends, we have completed the first half of the Gita. Before we proceed to the second, it is good to look back.
In the First Chapter it was made clear that the Gita aims at destroying delusion and making us pursue svadharma.
We saw in the Second Chapter the basic principles of life, the way of action and the image of the sthitaprajna (the
steadfast seer). Karma, vikarma and akarma were described in the Third, Forth and Fifth Chapters. Karma means
the performance of svadharma; vikarma means the inward action which is performed to support the outward action
performed as svadharma.
When karma and vikarma become one, the mind and heart are purified and cleansed, the cravings we have acquired
weaken, passions are stilled, feelings of difference vanish and then the state of akarma is reached. This state of
akarma, it has been said, is of two kinds. In one, you feel though you work day and night, that you are not working
at all; in the other, though you work not at all, you work unceasingly. Though these two kinds appear different,
they are in their perfection one. Though the names karma yoga and sannyasa are different, the truth at the heart
of both is the same. The state of akarma is the final stage, the ultimate goal. This state is called "moksha". Thus in
the first five Chapters the philosophy of life has been fully set out.
2. After this, from the Sixth Chapter onwards, are described the more important methods of vikarma useful for
cleansing the mind from within and attaining the ideal state of akarma.
The Sixth Chapter describes the means to one-pointedness - meditation, and as aids to meditation, practice
(abhyasa) and detachment (vairagya). The Seventh Chapter teaches us the noble and comprehensive means of
devotion (bhakti). Go to the Lord with love; go in search of knowledge; go seeking the good of the world; go for
your personal need - go for whatever reason, only reach His presence once. We give this chapter the title of
prapatti-yoga, the yoga that impels you to surrender to the Lord. This surrender has to be constantly practiced;
the yoga to Constancy (saatatya-yoga) is found in the Eighth Chapter.
You will not find these names in the books, but they have been useful to me. Saatatya-yoga means continuing one's
sadhana to the end of one's life. The road that we have set out on, we should tread without stopping till we reach
the end. There is no hope of ever reaching the goal if we walk how and when we like. We should never grow
disgusted or despondent and complain. "How long are we to go on doing this sadhana?" Till we attain the fruit, the
'sadhana' (discipline) should continue without pause.
3. Having introduced us to the saatatya-yoga, the yoga of Constancy, the Lord, in the Ninth Chapter, teaches us a
truth commonplace in itself, but capable of transforming the whole quality of life - and this is raja-yoga.
In this one truth is concentrated, all arts and skill, all karma and vikarma, all practices, all methods of action lie
hidden in the yoga of dedication. This practice of dedication is raja-yoga; all practices find fulfillment here. This
comprehensive and all-powerful sadhana of dedication may seem easy and commonplace, but it is in reality hard.
The sadhana is easy because anyone, from a rustic to a scholar, can perform it without much effort each in his own
house and station. But easy though it is, it requires extra-ordinary merit to pursue it.
"Through much practice in virtue
I have come to love Vitthal."
It is only when the merits of many births accumulate that our hearts are drawn towards God. The most trivial
things bring tears to our eyes, but not the name of God. What is to be done? In one sense, as the saints say, this
sadhana is easy. But in another sense, it is also difficult, and it has become all the more difficult in modern times.
4. Today, the film materialism obscures our vision. Instead of beginning with an invocation to Ganesha, we begin
with the question, "Does God exist anywhere?" And no one; of course, sees Him anywhere. Life is full of passion and
greed, full of distortions. The best of philosophers today cannot rise beyond the thought of finding food for
everybody. This is no fault of theirs, because as things are at present, many lack even food. Today's main problem
is food. Our best brains are busy solving it. Sayanaacharya, the commentator of the Vedas says, "bubhukshamaanah
rudraroopena avatishthate" - "hungry He appears in the form of Rudra."

Hungry people are avataras (incarnations) of Rudra. To appease their hunger, many philosophical and political
theories have arisen. We cannot lift our head a moment from these problems. All our bhagiratha-prayatna, all our
heroic efforts, today, are towards this end of enabling people to eat their food in peace and comfort. If in such a
strange social order, even something as straight and easy as dedication to the Lord becomes very difficult, what is
there to wonder at? What then is one to do? How to master the yoga of dedication to the Lord, how to make it
easy - this is what we are going to see in the Tenth Chapter.
An easy way to learn to see God
5. The methods we employ to teach children how to read, these same methods this Chapter employs to teach us to
see God everywhere. We teach children the alphabet in two different ways. One method is to introduce the letters
by writing them big and after they have learnt to recognize them, to reduce their size. It is the same 'A' and the
same 'B'; only the letters were big then and are small now. This is one method. The other method is to teach the
easy letters first and the complicated ones later. In just these ways we should learn to see God. First, we should
see His presence clearly in the big things.
The Lord manifest in mighty natural objects like the sea and the mountain catches our eyes at once. Once we have
learnt to recognize the Supreme in these vast manifestations, once we have seen these mighty forms of God, we
shall recognize that every drop of water and every grain of sand is filled with the same God. There is no difference
in meaning between the capital 'A' and the small 'a' - between the gross and the subtle. This is one way. In the
second method we recognize the supreme forms that are directly and easily seen, and then go on to more
complicated forms. When the Lord is present in a natural way in person, we recognize Him easily.
This is not a simple 'letter' but a combination; not pure gold but an alloy. Ravana's penance and merit are indeed
great; but they are mixed with cruelty. First learn the simple 'letter' Rama. Compassionate, loving and lovable,
Rama is an easy God to know and make our own. But to recognize the God who is in Ravana, it takes some time. First
the simple, then the complicated letter.
We should train ourselves first to see the Lord in good people, and later on in those not so good. The immense
Being which we behold in the ocean is also present in the little drop of water. The Lord who is in Ramachandra is in
Ravana too. What is found in the gross is present in the subtle; what is found in the simple is present in the
complex. By these two methods we should learn to read the book of this world.
6. This vast creation is the Lord's Book. Because a thick veil covers our eyes it looks as though the book is closed.
In this Book of Creation, the Lord is written down everywhere in beautiful letters. But we do not understand it.
There is a big obstacle to our seeing the Lord. That is, man does not recognize the Lord in the ordinary simple
forms that are near him; the distant dazzling forms are too overpowering. If you tell him, "See the Lord in your
mother," he would say, "Is the Lord so simple and innocent?"
But if the Supreme Lord appears in all His splendor, can you endure the sight? Kunti wished to see the distant sun
face to face, near and direct; but as he approached she could not bear the heat. If the Lord comes and stands
before us in the fullness of His power, we cannot stand it; if He comes in the gentle homely form of one's mother,
He fails to command our respect. Rich sweets are indigestible; plain milk is unpalatable.
There are symptoms of misfortune and death. It is this sick mind that stands as an obstacle to our seeing the
Lord. It is essential to get rid of this state of mind. First let us read the Lord that is near, concrete, easy; and
then go on to the subtle and the complicated forms.
God in human form
7. The familiar form in which God first appears to us is our own mother. The Veda says, "matri devo bhava." "Let
your mother be your God." Who but the mother does the new-born child see? The Lord Himself stands there as
the embodiment of tenderness. It is this worship of the mother that we would carry to love of country, when we
sing "vande maataram" and then to love of the universal Mother Earth.

And yet in the beginning the first image of the Lord Supreme that comes before the child is the mother. It is not
impossible to attain moksha through the worship of the mother. What is worship of the mother but worship of the
Lord as love incarnate the mother is only the occasion and the symbol. The Lord pours into her His love and
tenderness and impels her from within. The poor woman does not understand whence this passion and attachment
wells up in her heart.
Does she cherish the child reckoning that he would be useful to her in her old age? Not at all. She gave birth to
the child. She went through agony. Those pains have made her mad for the child, have made him all the dearer to
her. Without loving him she cannot live. She cannot but love. The mother is the embodiment of boundless service.
Worshipping the mother is the noblest form of worship.
Call God by the name of "Mother." Is there a word nobler and greater? In the book of life, the big unfading letter
that we read is "Mother." Learn to see God in her. Then see Him in the father, and in the teacher. The teacher
gives us knowledge, he transforms us from animals into men. How great is his service! First the mother, then the
father, then the teacher and then the compassionate ones - the saints. First see the Lord in these concrete forms
before us. If the Lord is not be seen here, where else can He be seen?
8. Mother, father, teacher, saint see the Lord in them. If, in the same way, we learn to see Lord in little children,
how we should rejoice! Dhruva, Prahlada, Nachiketa, Sanandana, Sanatkumara were they not all children? But the
authors of the Puranas, Vyasa and the rest did not know where to place them. What to do with them. Shukadeva
and Shankaracharya were free of desire since childhood. And so too was Jnanadev.
All of them were children! But nowhere is the Lord manifest in such clear pure form as in these children. Lord
Jesus loved children dearly. Once His disciples asked Him, "You speak so much about the Kingdom of God. Who can
enter it?" He lifted up a child standing by and set him on table and said, "Of such is the Kingdom of God. To enter
therein, one must become as a little child." What Jesus said is true. Swami Ramdasa was once playing with children.
Some grown-up people who observed the saint, romping with the children were surprised. One of them asked,
"What has come over you to-day?" Samartha answered.
"Those who remained young became great,
Those who grew up became great rogues."
As one grows up one sprouts horns, one develops self-will. Then one never thinks of God. The hearts of little
children are unspoilt, their minds pure. We say to a child, "Don't tell lies." He asks, "What is a lie?" Then we
expound to him the doctrine that statement must correspond to fact. The boy is puzzled and begins to wonder
whether there is another way of speaking than saying what is. How can one say what is not? This is like telling one
to call a square a square and not a circle. All this only surprises the child.
What are children? Images of purity, of God-head. Grown-ups teach them all wrong. The truth is : if we cannot see
the Lord in mother, father, teacher, saint and child, in what other form can we see Him? There is no nobler form
of God than these. Learn first these gentle and familiar forms of the Lord. In these the Lord is written in bold,
clear letters.
God in Creation
9. First let us learn to see God in serene and holy human forms. In the same way let us see Him first in the sublime
and beautiful aspects of nature.
10. Look at the dawn, the divine glow that precedes sunrise. The rishis that sing the glories of this goddess, dance
with joy. Beautiful words spring from their hearts : "Oh Usha! You are the divine messenger sent to us by the Lord.
You are bathed in dew drops. You are the banner of immortality." The Vedic rishi says, "You, bring us the message
of the Lord, If, even after seeing you, I do not see and understand Him, who else can make Him known to me?"
Clothed in such beauty, Usha rises and dances before us, but we have no eyes for her.

11. Again, look at the Sun. To see him is to see God. What vivid pictures he paints upon the sky! For months the
painter moves his brush up and down the canvas, trying to paint the sunrise with a splash of colors. But rise early in
the morning and look at God's art. With what can we compare this art divine, this boundless beauty? But who
looks at this? While out there the Lord stands in all his loveliness, here the fellow draws his blanket closer and
snores.
The sun says, "You lazy creature, you would sleep for ever, but I shan't let you, I shall wake you up."
And he sends his living beams through the windows "suurya aatmaa jagatah tasthushah cha."
"The sun is the Self, the ground of all that moves and all that is still." The rishi calls him "mitra", friend.
"mitro janaan yaatayati bruvaano
mitro daadhar prithiviim uta dyaam."
"This friend calls out to the people and puts them to work. He upholds heaven and earth."
In truth the sun is the foundation of life. See the Lord in him.
12. And then the holy Ganga! When I was living in Kashi, I used to go and sit on the banks of the Ganga. I would go
and sit there in the loneliness of night. What beauty, what brightness in its flow! Those lovely and majestic waters
and countless stars of the sky in them! I would sit there speechless. What calm of the mind was mine when my eyes
were filled with the sight of the Ganga, which descended from the matted locks of Shiva, from the Himalayas, the
river by whose banks Kings, casting off the bauble of power, perform their austerities. In the stillness of the
peace, I began to understand why the Hindu wishes that after death his bones at least should be thrown into the
Ganga. You may laugh, but that does not alter the fact.
To me this bhavana, this faith appears worthy of acceptance and indeed holy. During the last moments they pour a
few drops of Ganga water into the mouth of the dying man. What are these drops, but the Lord Himself entering
the body. Regard the Ganga as God; it is His grace that flows as this water. Mother Ganga washes off and carries
away in her course all the uncleanliness of our mind and body. If God is not manifest to us in Mother Ganga, where
else shall we see Him? The sun, the rivers, the mighty ocean tossing up into the tumultuous waves, all these are
forms of God.
13. And the wind! Whence it comes and where it goes, we do not know. It is the messenger of the Lord. In our
India a great wind blows from the Himalayas and another from the mighty ocean. This purifying wind touches our
heart. It awakens us. It whispers in our ears. But who listens to its message? If the jailer does not give us our
letter with four lines scribbled on it, we feel sore. Poor wretch! what is there so precious in that letter? That wind
bring to you every moment the loving message of the Lord; listen to it.
14. The worship of Agni is described in the Vedas. Agni is Narayana. What a brightly shining form he has! When
two sticks are rubbed against each other, he shines forth.
Where was he hiding before? What heat, what light! The first sounds of the Veda emerged in the worship of Agni -

"agnimiile purohitam yajnasya devam ritvijam hotaaram ratnaphaatamam."
Look at the fire in whose worship the Vedas begin. When I see its flames, I am reminded of the excitement and
agitation of our human souls. Whether it be the domestic or the forest fire, its flames are never steady. The man
of detachment has no home. Wherever those flames are found, they set off excitement. They are ever in a state
of agitation. They yearn to rise high. Scientists would say that they flicker because of ether, or because of the
pressure of the wind. But so far as I see in the fire its eagerness to join the Supreme Being up there, the ocean of
light, Surya-narayana, and hence its restless, perpetual upward movement.

From birth to death without a pause, it leaps and runs. The sun is the whole of which the flames are parts. The
part yearns to rejoin the whole; it is only with extinction that the excitement ends, not before. It never considers
how far away from the sun it is. All it knows is how to rise above the earth to its utmost capacity. In this mere
fire, is it not vairagya, freedom from attachment, shining as fire? That is why the first sound of the Veda is
"agnimiile."
God in Creature
15. And the animals that serve us! Mother Cow - how full of tenderness and attachment she is, how loving! How
eagerly cows come running back up hill and down dale to their calves after going grazing all day long. The Vedic
rishis, seeing the gurgling rives bringing pure water from the mountains, think of the heavy uddered cows returning
lowing to their calves. The rishi says to the river, "Oh Goddess, you who bring holy, sweet and clean water, you are
like the cow bringing milk to her calf. As the cow will not stay in the forest, so you cannot stay in the mountains.
You come running fast to meet your thirsty children."
"vaas hraa iva dhenavah syandamaanaah."
In the form of the loving cow, the Lord stands at our door.
16. And then the horse! How beautiful, how true, how faithful! How dearly the Arabs love their horses? Don't you
know the story of the Arab and his horse? He was driven by circumstances to sell his horse, and he made up his
mind to do so. Carrying in his hand a purse full of gold coins, the price of the animal, he enters the stable. The
moment he sees the noble and loving eyes of the horse, he flings the purse down exclaiming, "Even if I have to die,
I will not sell my horse.
Come what may. Let me perish of hunger if I must. God will help me. How his skin tingles when we pat him! And what
a lovely mane he has! There is no end to his merits. What is there in a bicycle? Look after a horse well and he will
be ready to give up his life for you. He will be your friend and stay with you. A friend of mine was learning to ride.
The horse used to throw him off. He said, "The horse will not let me keep my seat." I said to him, "Do you only
attempt to ride the horse, or do you also feed him and look after him? When someone serves him, how can you ride
him?
Feed him yourself and give him water, rub him down and then try to ride him." He did so and said to me after a few
days, "The horse doesn't throw me off now." The horse is a form of the Lord. And would He throw off a servant?
The horse yielded to his devotion. The horse wants to know whether you are a devotee or not. The Lord Krishna
would rub down the horse Himself, and feed them out of his yellow silk garment. If there is a puddle or a ditch to
cross, the bicycle stops, but the horse jumps over. This beautiful and loving animal is a form of the Lord.
17. And the Lion! When I was in Baroda I would get up in the morning listening to its majestic roar. The majestic
beauty of his voice thrilled my heart. The magnificent sound proceeding from his heart was like the sound one
hears in the inmost shrine of a temple.
The noble courage, the fearless beauty of his expression! The regal gait and mien! His flowing mane is the chamara,
the royal insignia, provided by nature for the King of the forest. In a garden in Baroda there was a lion. He was not
free, he went round in a cage. But there was not a trace of cruelty in his eyes. There was compassion in his
expression and his look. It looked as though he had thought for the world and was absorbed in his own meditation.
In fact, the lion is a holy manifestation of the Lord. I read when I was a child, the story of "Androcles and the
Lion". What a wonderful story! The famished lion remembering Androcle's kindness, becomes his friend and licks
his feet. What does it mean? Androcles had seen in the lion the Lord Himself. There is always a lion near the Lord
Shiva. The lion is a creature of divine glory.
18. And is the tiger inferior? The power of the Lord shines through him. It is not impossible to make friends with
him. Bhagavan Panini, seated in the forest, was instructing his pupils. Just then a tiger came along. The boys got

frightened and shouted, "Tiger, Tiger!" Panini said calmly, "Well, what does 'vyaaghra' (tiger) mean? Vyaajighrati
itivyaaghrah." That is a vyaaghra whose sense of smell is acute.

Though the boys were afraid of the animal, to Panini it was a harmless delightful word. Seeing the tiger, he began
to explain the etymology of the world. The tiger ate Panini up. But what if it did? The tiger liked the sweet smell of
his body, and so tore it and ate it up. But Panini did not run away because he was a worshipper of shabda-brahman
(God as the Word). For him all things had become one. In the tiger too he recognized God as the Word.
Because of this greatness, he is reverently called "Bhagavan Panini," in the commentaries where his name occurs.
They express their deep gratitude to him for opening with the instrument of knowledge the eyes of the blind world
"ajnaanaandhasya lokasya jnaanaanjana shalaakayaa
ckakshurunmiililam yena tasmat paaninaye namah."
Thus Bhagavan Panini sees in the tiger the vision of the Lord. Jnanadev says "Though to our home comes heaven, or upon us springs the tiger,
Never let there be a break in the consciousness of Self."
Such was the state of Maharshi Panini. He had realized that the tiger was a divine manifestation.
19. So, too, with the serpent. People are much afraid of the snake. But the snake is, in its stern regard for
cleanliness, like a Brahmin. How clean! How beautiful! It cannot bear dirt. You may come across any number of dirty
Brahmins but have you ever seen a dirty snake? It is like a rishi living in solitude. Pure, bright and lovely, it shines
like a garland; why fear it? Our ancestors laid down ways of worshipping it. You may, if you like, say that Hinduism
is full of all sorts of superstitions, but worship of the snake is an integral part of it.
In my childhood I used to draw with turmeric the figure of a snake for my mother to worship. I would tell my
mother, "But there are nice pictures for sale in the shop, mother." She would answer, "That's no good. We want
none of that. Only the figure drawn by my child is good enough." And to it worship would be offered. Is this
madness? But think a little. In the month of shravan (July-August), it comes to us as a guest. In the rainy season,
the poor creature's house is filled with water. What could it do then?
This rishi, who lives in some remote and lonely spot, comes and lies down under the gable or between the logs,
wishing not to give us trouble. It takes up very little room. But we run after it with a stick. When at his need a
guest comes to our house, is this the way to welcome him? It is said to Saint Francis that, when he saw a snake in
the forest, he would welcome it lovingly by saying, "Come, brother, come!" And the snake would play in his lap and
crawl up and down his body.
Don't think this is fiction. Love certainly has such power. We speak of the venom of the snake, but have men less
of it? The snake stings now and then and it is never the first to hurt. Nine out of ten snakes are not poisonous.
They guard your fields. They live on the many kinds of vermin that destroy your crop. This helpful creature, so
clean, so powerful, this lover of solitude, is an image to the Lord. Snakes are connected in one way or another with
all our deities.
Ganesha wears one round his waist. Shiva warps one round his neck. And Vishnu sleeps on one as his bed. Realize the
secret, the charm of it. The meaning of it all is that the Lord's form is manifested through the snake. Recognize
the Lord who dwells in the serpent.
20. How many such examples shall I give? All I am doing is to use the imagination. The whole essence of the
Raamaayana lies is this beautiful power. The love of father and son, the love of mother and child, the love of
brothers, the love of husband and wife - all this is found in the Raamaayana. But it is not because of these things

that the Raamaayana is dear to me. It is dear to me because Rama made friends with the monkeys. People today say
that these monkeys belonged to the Naga tribe. It is the job of the historians to research into the things of the
past. I have nothing against their labours, but if Rama made friends with real monkeys, what is there impossible in
that? The Ramatva, the Rama-ness of Rama, his charm, lies precisely here that he made friends with monkeys.
Such too was the relation between Krishna and the cows. The ground of Krishna-worship is this imagination. Look at
any picture of Krishna; you will see him surrounded by cows. Gopala Krishna, Krishna the cowherd! If we take the
cow away from Krishna, what is left of Krishna? If from Rama we remove the monkeys, how much of Rama is there
even in Rama? Rama saw the Supreme in the monkeys too and became their friend and comrade. This is the key to
the Raamaayana.
Without this key you would miss its beauty. The love of father and son, of mother and child, you will find elsewhere
too, but this union, this sweet friendship between nara and vanara, between man and monkey, you will find nowhere
else. The Lord in the monkey, the Raamaayana has made its own. At sight of the monkeys, the rishis are filled with
joy. From Ramtek to the banks of the Krishna these monkeys wandered and played, jumping from branch to branch,
without once touching the ground. When the rishis, with their delicate sympathies saw the dense forests and the
monkeys at play, poetry welled up in their hearts, they were thrilled.
The Upanishads, in describing the eyes of Brahma, compare them to the eyes of a monkey. The monkey's eyes are
very restless. They look on all sides at once, the eyes of Brahma should be like this too. It would not do for the
Lord to have His eyes fixed. It is all right for you and me to sit in meditation with eyes shut; but if the Lord is lost
in meditatiion, what would happen to the world? So rishis see in monkeys the eyes of the Lord who watches all
creatures. Learn to see the Lord in monkeys.
21. And then the peacock! Peacocks are rare in Maharashtra but they abound in Gujarat. When I was in Gujarat, I
used to walk some ten miles daily, and saw many peacocks. When clouds gather and it is about to rain and the sky
darkens, the peacocks begin to call. You will understand it only when you have once heard for yourself the piercing
note drawn out from the depths of its heart. The structure of our music is built on this note of the peacock which
is our shadaja swara - "shadjam rauti."
This primary note we got from the peacock, then from it, we derived the other notes. Its face turned upwards to
the clouds, its majestic feathers spread out like an umbrella, as its hears the roaring clouds - what it man's finery
before this beauty? Kings and emperors too deck themselves elaborately, but how can they compete with the glory
of the peacock's tail? Those thousand eyes, that many-colored brightness, the marvelously soft and lovely texture,
the consummate workmanship! Look at this tail for a while, and see in it the presence of the Lord. All creation is
decked out in this way. Wherever we turn, the Lord stands there for us to see but we who do not see Him are
wretched. Tukaram says:"The Lord is omnipresent and ever-present;
but to the wretched He is elusive."
To the saints there is prosperity always, but we unfortunate ones are troubled by famine everywhere.
22. And how can one forget the cuckoo? Whom does it call? In the summer, when rivers and tanks have gone dry,
tender young leaves sprout on the trees. It seems to ask, "Who gave this beauty to the trees? Where is the giver
of these gifts?" How sweet, how eager is the call! In the Hindu religion there is a vrata, an observance, relating to
the cuckoo's voice. Women take a vow not to eat any food until they have heard the cuckoo's call. This vrata
teaches us to see the Supreme manifest in the voice of the cuckoo. The cuckoo calls so sweetly that it seems to be
chanting some Upanishad. One hears its voice, but does not see it. The English poet Wordsworth sings "O Cuckoo! shall I call thee Bird,
Or but a wandering Voice?
... ... ... ... ...
To seek thee did I often rove
Through woods and on the green;
And thou wert still a hope, a love;

Still longed for, never seen."
While the great English poet wanders in search of the cuckoo, the ordinary women in Indian homes eat no food till
they see it. This kokila-vrata confer on Indian women the status of poets. In the cuckoo that calls so sweetly
bringing such joy, we see the Lord in His beauty.
23. If the cuckoo is beautiful, is the crow ugly? No, the crow too is worthy of respect. To me it is very dear, with
its deep black color, and its deep strong voice. Do you think its voice raucous? I don't, it voice too is sweet. As it
comes near, beating its wings, how lovely it looks?
Does it not capture the hearts of little children? The little child refuses to take food, cooped up in the house. One
has to take him out into the open yard and show him crows and sparrows before he can be persuaded to eat. Is the
child mad that he loves the crow? Far from it, he is full of wisdom. At once the child becomes one with the Lord in
the form of the crow. The mother may pour curds or milk on the rice, or cover it with sugar - nothing pleases the
child. His pleasure is in the crow that flaps its wings, and cocks its head.
All the fables of Aesop are based on the child's lively interest in the he objects of creation. Aesop saw the Lord
everywhere. Among the books I love I should give first place to Aesop's Fables; I shall never forget it. Aesop's
kingdom is not peopled only with human beings with two hands and two feet. In it, foxes, dogs, crows, deer, hares,
tortoises, snakes, worms, all talk and laugh. It is a huge conference. The whole of creation speaks to Aesop. He had
the divine vision. The Raamaayana too is based on this truth, on this vision. Tulsidas describes the lila play of Rama
as a child.
Rama is playing in the courtyard. A crow comes near and Rama approaches it slowly to catch it. The crow jumps
back. At last Rama gets tired. But then an idea comes to him. He takes a sweet in his hand and draws nearer to it.
As he stretches out his hand further, the crow comes closer. Tulsidas gives a page to this description; because the
crow is the Lord. The same divinity is present in the crow as well as in Rama. The coming together of Rama and the
crow is the union of the Supreme with the Supreme.
In villains too
24. The truth of the matter is that God is present in all the forms of creation. As holy rivers, mighty mountains,
the majestic ocean, the tender-hearted cow, the noble steed, the magnificent lion, the sweet-voiced cuckoo, the
beautiful peacock, the pure hermit snake, the crow flapping its wings, the restless flame, the still stars - in all this
He is present. We should train our eyes to see Him. We should first learn the big letters and then the small ones;
we should first learn the easy letters and then the complex ones.
Until we master the complex letters, there is no progress in learning to read. At every step, in word after word,
the complex letters occur. We should learn to see the Lord who dwells in evil persons. We understand Rama, but we
should learn to understand Ravana too. We understand Prahlada, but we should learn to understand Hiranyakasipu
too. The Vedas say "namonamah stenaanaam pataye namo namah
namah punjishthebhyo namo nishaadebhyah
brahma daashaa brahma daasa brahmaiva ime kitavaah."
"Salutation to the prince of robbers! Salutations to the cruel ones, to the doers of harm! The thugs,
the thieves, the robbers, all are Brahman. Salutations to them all!"

What does this mean? In means that, now that we have mastered the easy letters, we can proceed to the difficult
ones. Carlyle has written a book on "Hero Worship." There he describes Napoleon as a hero, as a manifestation of
God. What is found there is not the pure Supreme, but a mixture - but even this should be understood. So in
Tulsidas, Ravana is called Rama's enemy-bhakta. Yes, the nature and conduct of this bhakta is rather peculiar.

By contact with fire, the foot swells up in blisters, but the swelling subsides when a hot fomentation's is applied. It
is one and the same fire, but it manifests itself differently in different circumstances. Though manifested
differently in Rama and in Ravana, it is the same Supreme that is present in both.
Gross and subtle, pure and mixed, simple and complex - learn all this and realize in the end that there is no place
where the Lord is not. In every atom He alone is present. From the ant to the universe He spreads. The Lord who
cares equally for all, the compassionate one who is all knowledge, tenderness, skill, holiness and beauty - He stands
on all sides everywhere.

THE VISION OF THE COSMIC FORM Arjuna's eagerness to see it
1. Brothers, we learned last week how to recognize the Supreme who pervades the countless object of the
Universe, and how to make this vast spectacle our own. How to see God, first in the gross then in the subtle, first
in the simple then in the complex and thus to see Him in all things, how to realize Him, how through practice day
and night, to come to feel that the whole world is oneself all this we saw in the last Chapter. Now we turn to the
Eleventh Chapter. In this Chapter the Lord reveals His visible form, and so His grace. Arjuna said, "Lord, I wish to
behold with these eyes your complete form, the form in which is manifest all the power of your glory." What
Arjuna prayed for was vishvaruupa-darshana, the vision of cosmic form.
2. We use words like vishva and jagat, the universe and the world. This world is a small part of the universe. And
even this small part we are unable to understand. If we think of the whole universe, this world which seemed so
vast now seems tiny. If we look at up the night sky we see innumerable orbs. Do we know the real nature of those
festoons of light hung up in the heavens, those lovely little flower, those millions of twinkling stars? Those little
stars are immensely big. They are big enough to contain countless suns. They are shining spheres of elements
burning. Who can count them?
They are beyond limits of measure. Even the naked eye can see thousands of them. When we look through a
telescope millions become visible. With more powerful telescopes many more can be seen and it will be difficult to
say where or how it will all end. Of this infinite creation spreading above, below and on all sides of us, a tiny bit is
what we call our world. And how huge even this world
appears to us!
3. This vast creation is but one aspect of the Lord's form. Now let us look at another of it, that is, Time. If we
consider the past, our knowledge of history goes back atmost to ten thousand years. Of the time before that, we
know nothing. While historical time is of the order of ten thousand years, our individual life's length is not even a
hundred years. Time stretches without beginning or end. It is impossible to measure or count the time that is past.
It is equally impossible to conceive the time that is to come.
Just as our world is so tiny as against the vastness of space, our 10,000 years of history is as nothing in the
infinity of Time, the past is without a beginning and the future without an end. And as for this brief present, even
as we are speaking, it slips into the past. Even as we try to describe where the present is, it has become the past.
This so elusive present is all that belongs to us. I am speaking now; but as the words come out of my mouth they
have already joined the past. Thus this great river of time flows continuously forward. We know neither its source
nor its end; we see only a little part of the flow in the middle.
4. If we look at creation in these two ways, as a tremendous expanse of Space and a tremendous flow of time, we
cannot see the limits of it, however much we stretch our imagination. In Arjuna's heart arose a desire to behold
the form of the Supreme, to see all at once the omnipresent Lord, who pervades all Time, past, present and future
and all Space, here, above, below and everywhere. From this desire springs the Eleventh Chapter.
5. Arjuna was very dear to the Lord. How dear? So dear that naming in the Tenth Chapter the forms in which he
should be contemplated, the Lord says, "Among the Pandavas think of me as Arjuna." Sri Krishna says,

"paandavaanaam dhananjaya." Where can we find a stronger infatuation? This shows how love can make one mad.
The Lord's love for Arjuna knew no bounds. The Eleventh Chapter is the gracious fulfillment of that love. Arjuna's
desire to see the divine form, the Lord satisfied by endowing him with divine vision. He gave him the grace of His
love.
The full vision in the small image
6. In this Chapter is found a beautiful and entrancing description of the divine form. Though all this is true, I am
not particularly drawn to this vishvaruupa. I am quite satisfied with a small image. I have learned to enjoy the
sweetness of the small and common but beautiful image before me. The Lord is not cut up into little parts. It does
not seem to me that the form of the Lord that we can see is only a part of Him and that the rest is left out; but I
see that the Lord who pervades this vast universe is present in His fullness in the little image, in the grain of sand.
There is no question of greater or less. The sweetness of the ocean of nectar is found in every drop of it. I have
got a tiny little drop of amrita (nectar of immortality); I feel that I should enjoy for ever the sweetness of that
drop. I chose the example of amrita, and not of milk or water, on purpose. A cup of milk is just as sweet as a
pitcher of it; but though the taste is the same, the nutritive power is different. But there is no difference
between a drop of amrita and a cup of it. Not only the sweetness but the nourishment is the same in the sea of
nectar and in a drop of it. If we drink one drop of it, we gain the fullness of amritatva, immortality.
In the same way, the same beauty and holiness that there is in the cosmic form of the Lord is also present in the
little image.
If I am not able to recognize wheat when I am shown a handful of it, of what use is it to put before me a sackful!
If I do not recognize Him in the little models before me, how can I recognize Him in all His vastness? Does size
make any difference? To understand the small form is to understand the big. Hence, I feel no desire that the
Lord should show to me His cosmic form. Nor have I, like Arjuna, the right to ask for it. Moreover, it is not as if
what is seen by me is only a part of the cosmic form.
If someone brought a part torn off from a picture we cannot imagine from it the whole picture. But the Lord is not
made up of parts in this way; one of Him cannot be cut off from the rest. Even in a little image, the whole of that
infinite Supreme is contained. What is the difference between a small photograph and a big one? Everything that is
found in the big one is found in the small too. The small one is not a portion, a fragment of the big. A letter means
the same whether it is written big or it is written small. This is the meaning of image-worship.
7. Many people have opposed image-worship. Foreigners, and even thinkers of our own country, have found fault
with it. But the more I think of it, the more I realize its beauty. What is the meaning of it? Image-worship is the
vidya, the art of experiencing the whole universe in a little object. Is it wrong to learn the vidya which helps us to
see the whole world in a little village?
This is not mere imagination, it is a matter of direct experience. What there is in the cosmic form, all of it is
contained in a little image, in a grain of sand. In that lump of clay is everything - the mango, the banana, wheat,
gold, copper and silver. All the world is in that grain of sand. Just as an actor in a small troupe appears again and
again on the stage taking different roles, the Lord appears in the universe.
Like a playwright who writes his own play and himself takes all the parts in it, the Lord produces a play without end,
and Himself acts playing the parts of countless characters on His stage. If we understand one chapter in this
infinite drama, we shall understand them all.
8. The basic of image-worship is the same as that of metaphors and similes in poetry. When we see a circle or a
sphere we are filled with joy, for there is an order, a shapeliness in it. This shapeliness is a divine quality. The
Lord's creation is beautiful in all its parts and relations. There is perfect harmony in it. The sphere is an image of
the shapeliness of the Lord. But even so is the twisted tree in the undergrowth of the forest. There is in it the
freedom of the Lord. This tree knows no bondage. Who can bind the Lord?

The Lord who is beyond all bounds, is in that contorted, unshapely tree. A tall straight column reminds us of the
Lord. In the highly wrought ornamented pillar we see the Lord who has painted the sky with stars. In a welltrimmed garden we see the restraint of the Lord and in the primeval forest we see His grandeur and freedom. In
both we find joy. Are we then mad? No, there is joy in both, because there is in each a quality of the Lord. The
power in the smooth shaligram is also in the rough linga taken from the Narmada. Hence, if I do not see the form
of the Lord in all its majesty, it does not matter.
9. It is because the Lord is present in every object through a distinct quality, that we find joy in it, we feel at one
with it. This joy is not without a cause. Why do we feel joy? We are somehow related to it, and hence the joy. The
mother's heart dances at the sight of her child, because she knows the kinship. In the same way, like every object
to the Lord. The Lord in me is also in the object. To strengthen this kinship is to increase joy. There is no other
means for joy. Begin to establish the link of love everywhere, and then watch the miracles happen. You will see
them in every grain and every drop, the Lord who pervades the boundless universe. When we have the power to see
this, what else do we need?
For this however, it is essential to discipline and train the senses. When the desire for enjoyment goes and the
holy outlook of love is gained, then we shall see God alone in all objects. This idea is described beautifully in the
Upanishads. What is the color of the atman? What can we say
about this? The rishi says, with love:

"yathaa ayam indragopah."
The atman is like this scarlet silk-soft insect the indragopa. When one looks at the indragopa, what joy there is!
What is the source of this joy? That which exists in me, exists in the indragopa too. If there is no kinship between
us, how could there be joy? The beautiful atman within me is within the indragopa too. Hence, the comparison. Why
do we use similes? Why do we find joy in them? We use similes because things are alike, and we find joy in the
likeness. If the things compared have nothing in common, where is the joy in it?
If someone says that salt is like pepper, we should think him mad. But if someone says that the stars are like
flowers, we see the likeness and enjoy it. When we say, "Salt is like pepper," we do not experience the likeness, but
to one whose vision has become wide enough to see the same Lord in the salt and in the pepper, the question,
"What is salt like?" and the answer, "It is like pepper," will bring an experience of joy. The warp and the woof of all
the objects in the world in the Lord's form. To see it, where is the need for the vision of the cosmic form?
Not for us the cosmic form
10. Even if we see the cosmic form can we bear it? For a beautiful little image of the Lord I feel a sweetness of
love, a sense of belonging, that I can never experience on seeing the cosmic form. Arjuna's state was not far
different. He trembles and pleads at last, "Lord, let me see your dearfamiliar form again." Arjuna seems to tell us
from his own experience, "Do not desire to see the cosmic form of the Lord." It is best that the Lord is seen
pervading all the worlds, and all times, past, present and future.
If that distant star should draw itself up into a ball of fire, come down and stand in front of me, what would
happen to me? How peaceful those stars appear! They seem to speak to me from the far distance. But if the star
that calms the eye from afar, came near, then it is a burning ball. I would be reduced to ashes. Let all things be
where they are and as they are in this boundless vast creation of the Lord. What joy can there be in huddling them
all up into a single room? Those thousands of pigeons in the aviary in Bombay, what freedom do they have? It is a
depressing sight. The pleasure is in this, that creation is divided into three spheres, here, above and below.
11. And the same is true of Time. We do not remember the past and of the future, we know nothing - and this is
only for our good. In the Holy Quran are mentioned five things where God has sole power and man is helpless. One
of them is knowledge of the future. We are free to guess, but guessing is not knowledge. This ignorance concerning
the future is indeed our good fortune. Likewise, our forgetfulness of the past is truly good. If a bad man becomes
a good one, I do not respect him when I remember the past. No matter what he says, I am unable to forget his old
sins.

It is only when he dies and is reborn in another form that the world can forget his sins. Memories of the past
increase our evil dispositions. When all past experience is forgotten, everything is over. There must be some way of
forgetting the sins and virtues of the past. That way is death. When we cannot endure the sufferings of this birth,
why take up the muckheaps of past janmas? Is there not enough rubbish in the little room of this one life? Even
our childhood we tend to forget. And it is good to forget it. To achieve Hindu-Muslim unity the only means is to
forget the past. Aurangazeb may have been a tyrant, but how long will you repeat it?
There is a Gujarati folk-song by Ratan Bai which one hears very often. Its concluding lines say, "The fame of men
alone survives on earth, their sins are forgotten." Time is like a sieve. We should take only the good things of
history and cast off the evil. If men would forget the evil and remember only good, how wonderful it would be! But
this does not happen. Forgetfulness is necessary, and that is why the Lord has given us death.
12. In truth, the world, as it is, is auspicious. Where is the need to gather up into little spot this world of Time and
Space? Familiarity breeds contempt. We should be intimate with some things and keep others at a distance. Before
our teacher we sit humbly, at a distance. But with our mother, we go and sit in her lap. There is an appropriate way
of dealing with the various images of reality. While we draw close to a flower, we step back from the fire. The
beauty of the stars is in their distance. This is so with all creation. It is not as if we shall increase our joy by
bringing very near to us that which is very far away. Real pleasure lies in letting things be wherever they are.
We cannot say that something that gives delight from afar will always confer greater comfort when brought near.
We should leave it out there and enjoy it from afar. There is no meaning in an enforced familiarity.
13. There is no saying that there is joy or good in knowing the past and the future. Arjuna, overmastered by love,
importunately demanded, and the Lord yielded, and revealed to him the vision of His cosmic form. But for me the
little image of the Lord will suffice. This little image is not a fragment of the Supreme. And even if it were, even if
I saw only a foot or the toe of a foot of His boundless body, I would say, "How blessed I am! How great is my good
fortune!" I have learnt this from experience. When Shri Jamnalal Bajaj threw open to the Harijans the
Lakshminarayan temple in Wardha, I too went there for darshan.
For some fifteen or twenty minutes I stood gazing at the image. It was as if I was in samadhi. As I looked at the
face, the chest, the hands and then the feet, my eyes were rooted in the feet. All that remained with me was the
feeling, "Sweet indeed is the worship of Your Feet." If the great Lord cannot be contained within a little image, is
not enough that we behold His Feet? Arjuna pleaded with the Lord; he could claim much from Him. How intimate
was friendship, how great his love and affection! What claims have I? A sight of the Feet is enough for me. That is
more than I deserve.
The Quintessence
14. On this description of the Lord's divine form I do not wish to dwell with my mind; to approach it with the mind
would be sin. Let us read again and again the holy verses describing the cosmic form and become pure. I do not like
to employ the mind to cut up the Lord's form. It would be like the aghora form of worship. Those who follow this
path go to the cremation ground and tearing of corpses perform tantra worship. The divine form of the Lord -

"vishvataschakshuruta vishvatomukho
vishvato baahuruta vishvataspaat."
it is widespread, infinite. Let us recite the verses describing it, cleanse the mind of sin, purify it.
15. In this description of the Lord there is only one point at which the mind begins to think. The Lord tells Arjuna,
"Arjuna, all these are mortal; make yourself an occasion, an instrument - I am the real doer of all action." These
words keep ringing in one's heart.
When the thought arises in the mind that one should make oneself an instrument in the Lord's hand, then the mind
begins to reflect. How does one make oneself an instrument in God's hand? How does one become a flute in
Krishna's hands? What would it be like if He put me to his lips and drew sweet notes through me? To be a flute

means to become hollow. But I am stuffed full with passions and desires. How then can music come through me? My
tone is gruff. I am gross, I am filled with aham-kara, the sense of 'I'.
I must empty myself of ego. Only when I become fully free, altogether empty, will the Lord breathe though me.
But to become a flute at the lips of the Lord is deed of very great daring. If I wish to become the sandal beneath
His Feet, even that would not be easy. The sandals of the Lord should be so soft that they will cause no pain to His
feet. I should place myself between His Feet and the thorns and stones. I should cure and refine myself
continually, and grow softer. And so, it is not easy to become even the sandals of the Lord. If I am to be wielded as
a sword by the Lord, I must not be a massive lump of iron.
I should whet myself on the grindstone of tapas, penance, and acquire a keen and tempered edge. My life should
shine like a sword in the hands of the Lord. These thoughts arise in my mind. I am lost in the wish to become an
instrument.
How this can come to be, the Lord Himself tells us in the last sloka of this Chapter. Shankaracharya in his
commentary calls this sloka, sarvarthasaara, the quintessence of the Gita. It runs -

"matkarmakrit matparamo madbhaktah sangavarjitah
nirvairassarvabhuteshu yah sa maameti paandava."
"He who bears enmity towards none, he who stands impartial and is free from attachment and serves me selflessly,
he who dedicates to me all that he does, he who is filled with devotion to me, all-enduring; free of passion and
desire, full of love, such a devotee becomes an instrument in the hand of the Lord." This is the essence of the
Gita's teaching.

BHAKTI : SAGUNA AND NIRGUNA
From one-pointedness to universality
1. The waters of the Ganga are everywhere holy and cleansing, but at Haridwar, Kashi and Prayag, they have special
purity. They have made the whole world holy. The Gita too is sacred from beginning to end. But some of the
intermediate chapters have become holy places. One such place is the Twelfth Chapter.
The Lord Himself calls this "the stream of nectar" - "ye tu dharmyaamritam idam yathoktam paryupaasate." This
is small Chapter with only twenty slokas, nevertheless it is a stream of nectar. It is sweet like nectar and confers
a new and immortal life. In this Chapter, the Lord has Himself sung the essence of the glory of devotion, bhakti.
2. In reality, from the Sixth Chapter onwards, the philosophy of bhakti has been expounded. The exposition of the
science of life occupied us in the first five Chapters. The karma which consists the performance of svadharma, the
vikarma, the accompanying inner process which helps karma, and the final state of akarma resulting from the
practice of both, which turns to ashes all karma - these ideas were expounded in the first five Chapters.
With this, the science of life is complete. Then, from the Sixth Chapter to the end of the Eleventh Chapter, a kind
of inquiry into the philosophy of bhakti engaged us. It began with ekagrataa, one - pointedness. The Sixth Chapter
describes how to make the mind one-pointed, the means to this end, and the need for it. The Eleventh Chapter
describes samagrataa, choiceless universal awareness.
We should now see how we made the long journey from ekagrataa to samagrataa. We began with one-pointedness of
mind. Once concentration has been attained, one can pursue any subject. To mention a subject which I like, we can
apply the concentrated mind to the study of mathematics. Assuredly, we gain much by this. But this is not the
highest good we can get from concentration of mind. We cannot judge the full value of concentration by the study
of mathematics. Through concentration we may achieve high success in mathematics and other branches of
knowledge - but this is no true test of its value.

Therefore, the Seventh Chapter tells us that it is towards the feet of the Lord that our vision must be turned.
The Eighth Chapter says that we should unceasingly concentrate on the feet of the Lord - that we should try till
the moment of death to keep our eyes and ears, our speech, absorbed in them. All our senses should be thus
trained - "The senses are now at home here; except through this awareness, they see nothing."
All the senses should be filled with the Lord. Whether those around us are lamenting loudly or praising the Lord,
whether they are weaving webs of vaasanaas, or are saints free from desire, whether it is night or day, the
practice of constancy throughout life in order that at the moment of death the Lord may stand in front of us - this
is taught in the Eighth Chapter.
In the Sixth Chapter, ekagrataa, one pointedness; in the Seventh Chapter, ekagrataa towards the Lord, which is
prapatti or surrender; in the Eighth Chapter, saatatya or constancy, an in the Ninth Chapter, samarpana or perfect
dedicati n and service -these are described. In the Tenth Chapter, the order of progression the successive stages
are described - how to proceed step by step, how to receive in the image of the Lord in one's heart, how gradually
to realize the Supreme Being who pervades all things from the little ant to Brahmadeva.
The Eleventh Chapter describes samagrataa, cosmic awareness. It is the vision of the cosmic form that I call
samagrataa-yoga. The vision of the cosmic form is to experience all creation in a grain of sand. This is the viraat
darshan. Thus, between the Sixth and the Eleventh Chapters, bhakti rasa is passed again and again through various
filters.
The saguna devotee and the nirguna devotee - both children of the same mother
3. Now, in the Twelfth Chapter we come to the end of the treatment of the philosophy of bhakti. Arjuna
questioned the Lord here about the perfect state, as once before in the Fifth Chapter he questioned Him at the
end of the discussion about the philosophy of life. Arjuna asks, "Lord, some worship you as saguna, with form,
others as nirguna, without form. Tell me which of the two pleases you more."
4. What answer could the Lord give? This is like asking a mother to choose between her two sons. One of the two is
a little child, who clings to his mother, who is filled with joy at sight of his mother, and cries when he is parted
from her even for a moment. Without her the world seems empty to him. This is the younger son. The other son is
older. He too loves his mother dearly, but he has grown up and has reached the age of discretion.
He can bear to stay away from his mother. Even if he has to stay away from her for five or six months, he would
not mind it. He serves his mother, taking full responsibility on himself. Because he is busy with his work, he is able
to endure separation from her. He is respected by the world, and his mother is happy listening to people speaking
highly of him. That is the elder son.
If the mother is asked, "You can keep only one of these two sons. Which of them would you have?" What answer
could she give? Which son would she choose? Could she weigh them in a balance? Considering the mother's
situation, what would be her natural answer? In her helplessness, she would say, "If I must give up one of them, I
shall reconcile myself to parting from the elder son." She holds the little child closer to herself, she cannot let him
go.
Drawn by the younger child, she might say something like, "It would not matter so much if the elder son goes." But
this is no real answer to the question, which of the sons she loves more. She says it because she has to say
something. But it would not be right to dig into the meaning of her words.
5. The Lord had to face the same difficulty as this mother when Arjuna questioned Him. Arjuna asked, Lord You
have two kinds of bhaktas. One of them loves you dearly and always thinks of you. His eyes yearn to see you, his
ears to hear your praise, his hands and feet to serve you. The other, more self-reliant, self-controlled, concerned
for the welfare of all creatures is so absorbed, day and night in the disinterested service of society, that he
seems not to think of you at all. He is a bhakta filled with a sense of oneness.

Tell me which of them is dearer to you." Like the mother in the story, Krishna too says, "The saguna bhakta, is dear
to me. But the other bhakta, the advaiti, is also dear to me." The Lord too is in a dilemma - He gives some sort of
an answer. 6. And as a matter of fact, the two bhaktas are very much alike in every way. Their claims are equal. To
judge between them is to attempt something improper and impossible.
As Arjuna questioned the Lord about karma in the Fifth Chapter, so he questions Him about bhakti here. In the
Fifth Chapter, it is said that, with the help of karma and vikarma man attains the state of akarma. This state of
akarma appears in two forms - while in one, a man acts day and night and yet does nothing, in the other, though he
seems to do nothing all the twenty-four hours of the day, he turns the world upside down. Akarma appears a
segment of a circle with that of another.
But how can we compare two segments of the same circle? Both have the same shape and properties - they have
the same form. But in describing the basis of akarma, the Lord calls the one sannyaasa and the other karma-yoga.
Though the names are different, the substance is the same. In the end, the choice is left to be decided according
as which is easier and more accessible.
7. The problem of saguna and nirguna is similar. The saguna devotee serves the Lord though the indriyas, the
organs of perception and action, the nirguna devotee thinks constantly of the good of all the world. The first
appears absorbed in outward service, but he meditates constantly within. The other seems to do no direct service,
but within him a great service is going on. Which of these two bhaktas is superior?
The one who works day and night and yet does not act, is the saguna devotee. The nirguna devotee is one who is
concerned within for the good of all, is thinking constantly of them. Though differing outwardly, the two are of the
same nature within, and both are dear to the Lord. But, of the two, saguna bhakti is much the easier. Here again
the Lord gives the same answer that He gave in the Fifth Chapter.
Saguna is easy and safe
8. In the yoga of saguna bhakti, we directly employ the indriyas. The indriyas can be either a help o a hindrance or
both. Whether they save or destroy depends on the way we look at them. Suppose that a man's mother is at the
point of death, and wishes to see him; but there is a distance of fifteen miles between them. It is wild, uneven
country, with only a footpath. In this situation, is the footpath a help or a hindrance? He might say, "What a
wretched track! But for this, I would be by my mother's side this moment!"
To such a man, the path appears an enemy. But he manages somehow to walk the distance, all the time cursing the
path. But, whatever the difficulties of the path, he has to keep going and hurry forward. If he looks on the path as
his enemy and sits down in despair, the victory will go to his enemy, the path. But by running fast, he achieves
victory. Another man in the same plight may say, "In this wilderness, thank God there is at least this narrow path.
This will help me to reach my ailing mother. If even this were not available, how could I hope to cross the hills and
jungles?" With gratitude he accepts the footpath as a ready means. He regards it with affection, as a friend, not
an enemy. Whether you regard it as a friend or an enemy, as a help or hindrance, you have to walk swiftly along the
path. Whether the path is an aid or an obstacle - this depends on the outlook of the man who treads it. This applies
to the indriyas also. Whether they are help or a hindrance depends on the way you look at it.
9. For the saguna worshipper, the indriyas are an aid. They are like flowers to be offered up to the Lord. With his
eyes, he beholds His form; with his ears, he listens to His story; with his mouth, he utters His holy name; on his
feet he performs pilgrimages; and with his hands, renders service. In this way he dedicates all his indriyas to the
Lord. They are not there for enjoyment. The flowers are there to be offered to the Lord, not to be worn round
one's neck. Thus he uses all his senses in the service of the Lord. This is the way of the saguna worshipper.
But to the nirguna worshipper, the senses seem to be an obstruction. He keeps them under control; he locks them
up in a room. He starves them and stands guard over them. The saguna worshipper feels no need for such care. He
has surrendered his indriyas at the feet of the Lord. Both these are methods of controlling the indriyas, two ways
of restraining them. But whichever method we adopt, we must keep the indriyas under control. The aim of both the

methods is the same - to prevent them from wallowing in the pleasure of the senses - One method is easy, the
other difficult.
10. The nirguna worshipper is devoted to the welfare of all beings. This is no ordinary matter. "To work for the
good of all the world" is a thing easy to say, but difficult to practice. One devoted to the good of the world can
think of nothing else. That is why nirguna worship is difficult. Saguna worship, however, can be rendered in many
ways, according to one's powers and opportunities. To serve the little village we were born in, to look after one's
parents, this is saguna worship.
All we have to make sure is that we do not work against the welfare of
the world. No matter how insignificant your service is, so long as it causes no harm to others, it will ascend the
scale of bhakti; otherwise, it would become a form a attachment. Whether it is our parents or our friends, our
suffering kinsfolk or great saints, that we serve, we should regard them as the Lord. Imagine that in every one of
them you see an image of the Lord and rest satisfied. This saguna worship is easy, but nirguna worship is hard.
The meaning and substance of the two are the same. But saguna is easier, and therefore better. That is all.
11. Apart form ease, there is another advantage in saguna worship. There is danger in nirguna worship. Nirguna is all
jnana, knowledge. But saguna is full of love, of bhavana, of feeling. There is the moisture of the heart in it and
perfect safety for the bhakta. In nirguna, however, there is some danger. There was a time when I relied on jnana,
but now experience has taught me that mere jnana is not enough.
It is true that jnana reduces to ashes the grosser imperfections of the heart, but the subtle impurities it cannot
destroy. Self-reliance, reason, discrimination, discipline, detachment - even if you employ all these, the subtle
impurities cannot be removed. Only the waters of bhakti have the power to cleanse them. If you like, you can call,
this "para-avalambana," dependence of para, but this para does not mean "another" but "the Supreme." Except with
the help of the Lord, we cannot get rid of our impurities.
12. Some may say that we are here giving a narrow meaning to the word "jnana," that if jnana cannot cleanse
the mind, its value is reduced. I accept this objection, but what I say is that as long as we are in this physical body,
our knowledge, however pure it is, will have some impurity, some distortion, some imperfection - its power will be
limited. When pure jnana rises, I have not the slightest doubt that it will destroy every impurity, along with the
mind. But in this troubled and passionate flesh its power is reduced, and it cannot remove the subtler impurities.
This is why bhakti is necessary. Hence I say that in bhakti man is better protected. Saguna
bhakti is easy. It relies on the Supreme, while nirguna bhakti trusts in oneself. But what is the self that one
trusts? It is reliance on the Supreme that dwells within oneself. There is no man who attained purity with the help
of the mind alone Through self-reliance, that is, through realization of the Self within, pure knowledge is attained.
In other words, even in the self-reliance of nirguna bhakti, the ground is the atman, the self.
Without nirguna saguna too has defects
13. Just as I said that saguna worship is easy and safe, I can point to similar advantages in nirguna bhakti too. In
nirguna, there is a discipline, a restraint. For example, we start institutions for various kinds of service. Each of
these is built round an individual; he is its main support. In the beginning, the institution rests on a personality. But
as it grows, it should derive its strength not from an individual but from a principle.
If such fidelity to a principle does not develop in it, the moment the founder and inspirer dies, it is filled with
darkness and fall into ruin. Let me give an illustration I am fond of. When the belt of charkha snaps, not only are
we prevented from spinning any more, but we cannot transfer the sun yarn to the spindle. This is what happens to
the institution. When the man dies - it is orphaned. But this does not happen when fidelity to a person has been
replaced by fidelity to a principle.
14. Saguna, the personal, needs the help of nirguna, the impersonal. Now and again, we should learn to get out the
personal, the visible. The Ganga sprang from the Himalayas, the matted locks of Siva, but she did not stop there.

It was only when she emerged from them, and crossing mountains, valleys and forests, began to flow on the plains,
making music, that she was useful to people. In the same way, an institution should be ready to stand on the pillars
of principle even after the personality behind it is removed.
When a builder puts up an arch, he supports it from below; but once the arch is set, the support is removed. It is
only when it stands without the support, that we say that the support has done its work. It is true that the river
of inspiration rises in saguna but it should reach perfection in fidelity to principle, it should flow into nirguna. From
the womb of bhakti, jnana should be born. From the creeper of bhakti, the flower of jnana should blossom.
15. Lord Buddha knew this. Hence he prescribed the three dedications. Through at first the attachment is to a
person, there should develop from it attachment to principle; if this is not possible all at once, there should be, at
least attachment to the institution, in between. The loyalty which once was paid to an individual, must now spread
to ten or fifteen. When there is no loyalty to a sangha or an institution, the members would start quarreling among
themselves. First, dedication to an individual, then dedication to an institution, and finally, dedication to the
principle.
That is why the Buddhists take three vows of dedication "buddham sharanam gachhaami sangham sharanam gachhaami dhammam sharanam gachhaami."
First, loyalty to the person, then to the sangha, but neither of these is strong enough. Only when loyalty to
principles is established, the institution begins to produce results. The stream of inspiration may begin in saguna,
but should meet and merge in the sea of nirguna. Without nirguna, saguna is imperfect.
Nirguna keeps saguna from overflowing its proper bounds - hence saguna owes much to it.
16. In Hinduism, Christianity, Islam, and all other religions, there is image-worship in one form or another. Though
not the highest form of worship, it is considered worthy of respect, and something valuable in itself. Imageworship is free from defect only so long as it remains within the bounds of nirguna. Once it crosses these bounds,
defects appear in saguna.
Any religion which blurs the line between saguna and nirguna, declines and falls. In the ancient yogas, animal
sacrifices were offered. Even now worshippers of Shakti, sacrifice living animals to her. This is excess of image
worship. Here it has crossed its proper bounds, and has taken a wrong turn. But if there is the restraint of loyalty
to principle, there is no such danger.

The two are complementary - example from the Raamaayana
17. Saguna is not only easy but free from danger, but it needs nirguna to complete it. As saguna grows, the flower
of nirguna, of devotion to principle, should blossom. Nirguna and saguna complement each other, they are not
incompatible. Starting from saguna, one has to tread the path to the goal of nirguna : nirguna, too, needs the
waters of saguna to cleanse the subtle impurities of the mind. Each gains luster from the other.
18. Both these kinds of bhakti are nobly illustrated throughout the Raamaayana, especially in the Ayodhyaa Kaanda.
Bharata illustrates the nirguna form of bhakti, and Lakshmana, the saguna form.
19. When Rama set out for the forest, he did not intend to take Lakshmana with him. Rama did not think it was at
all necessary. He tried to console him saying, "Lakshman, I am going to the forest at the bidding of our father. You
should stay at home. By coming with me, you would only add to the suffering of our parents.

Serve our parents and our people. If you stay with them, I shall be free from care. Stay here in my place, and do
my duty for me. In going to the forest, I am facing no danger. I am only visiting ashramas of rishis." With one
word, Lakshmana makes a clean sweep of all Rama's arguments. Tulsidas pictures this incident vividly.
Lakshmana's answer is, "You have shown me the noblest path! It is also true that I ought to adopt it. But then, I
shall not be able to bear the burden of ruling the state. I have not the strength to act in your place. I am only a
child "diinhi mohi sikh niiki gasac (n)yi
laagi agam apni kadaraaii
narvar dhiir dharam-dhur-dhaari
nigam-niitike te adhikaari.
mai (n) sisu prabhu-saneh-pratipaalaa
mandar-meru ki lehi (n) maraalaa"
Lakshmana says, "How can the swan sustain the weight of Mount Meru? Till this moment, Rama, I have grown up
nourished by your love. All this statesmanship, you can preach to some one else. I am only a child," and so puts a
stop to the discussion.
20. Just as fish cannot live without water, Lakshmana could not live without Rama. He had not the strength for it.
With all his being he lived in and for Rama. When Rama slept, he found joy in keeping awake and serving him.
When the eye is threatened the hand rushes up to protect it, and takes the blow upon itself, in this way,
Lakshmana had become the hand or Rama. If there was a blow aimed at Rama, Lakshmana received it first. Tulsidas
illustrates this by a beautiful simile. The flag flies high and is greeted with songs of honor and praise. Its colors
and form are the subject of song and story. But who looks at the staff that stands straight and holds it?
Like the staff that sustains the flag, Lakshmana upholds Rama's fame. He stands straight and never bows or bends.
The fame is Rama's, and it fills the eyes of the world; but who observes the staff? The dome is
conspicuous, but the foundation catches no eye. Rama's glory fills the world, but few think of Lakshmana. For
fourteen years, this staff stood straight and strong, did not bend. He stayed in the background and spread Rama's
greatness.
Rama used Lakshmana to achieve some of his most difficult deeds. In the end, he entrusted to Lakshmana even the
task of taking Sita and leaving her in the forest. Poor Lakshmana did this too. Lakshmana was left with no separate
existence of his own. He had become Rama's eyes, Rama's hands and feet, Rama's mind. As the river becomes one
with the sea, Lakshmana's service had become one with Rama. He had become Rama's shadow. This devotion of
Lakshmana was saguna bhakti.
21. But Bharata practices nirguna bhakti. And this too, Tulsidas has pictured beautifully. When Rama left for the
forest, Bharata was not in Ayodhya. When Bharata returned home, Dasharatha had already died. Vashishtha, the
guru, advised Bharata to assume the rule of the state. But Bharata answered, "I must see Rama." He was anxious to
see Rama; at the same time, he also made arrangements for looking after the kingdom. His bhavana was, "The
kingdom is Rama's. To arrange for its administration is to do Rama's work.
The property belongs to the owner, to manage it alone is my duty." Bharata could not feel as Lakshmana. This is
Bharata's position. Devotion to Rama means carrying out the work of Rama; else what good is devotion? After
making all arrangements for the care of the State, he goes to the forest to meet Rama. He says to Rama, "Dear
brother, this is your kingdom. It is for you ... ... ..." but before he could complete the sentence, Rama intervenes,
"No Bharata, please look after the kingdom yourself."
Bharata stands still, shrinking from a refusal. He says, "I shall faithfully obey your command." Whatever Rama
says, he has to accept. All that was his, he had already surrendered to Rama.

22. He went back and performed the duties of the state. But he did this, not from Ayodhya, but from a place two
miles away, where he lived and did penance. As an ascetic he ruled the kingdom. When Rama and Bharata meet
again, it is difficult to make out which of them was the ascetic who had performed penance in the forest. The two
faces are alike, they are of the same age, they bear the same marks of tapasya on their faces - it is impossible to
say which is Rama and which is Bharata.
If someone could paint this situation, how noble it would
be! Though Bharata was physically far away from Rama, in spirit they were not separated even for an instant.
Though he attended to the affairs of the kingdom, his heart was all the time with Rama. Nirguna bhakti is filled to
the brim with saguna. How then could there be any thought of separation from Rama? Bharata never felt any sense
of separation from Rama. He was doing the work of his Lord.
23. The young people of today say, "We don't understand all this about Rama-naama, Rama-bhakti, and Ramaworship. But we shall do God's work." How God's work is to be done, Bharata has shown us by his example. By doing
God's work, he assimilated and transformed the separation from Rama. To keep doing God's work and so to have no
time even to feel the sense of separation from Him, is one thing; but, it is quite a different thing when one is
unconcerned about God.
To life of self-control, doing the work of the Lord, is rare indeed. Though Bharata's way of life is to work in the
spirit of nirguna, it never loses contact with its saguna basis. "Rama, my lord," he says, "I shall humbly do your
bidding. Whatever you say, I shall not doubt or question." But then, as he prepares to leave, he turns, again to
Rama, and says, "Lord, but my heart is yet unreconciled. I feel as if I've lost something." Rama at once understood
his yearning and said, "Here, take, these sandals." In the end, the respect for saguna remains.
In the end, saguna has moistened nirguna with the heart's affections. Lakshmana would not have been content with
Rama's sandals. In his view, it would have been like drinking buttermilk when one thirsts for milk. Bharata's standpoint is different. Though outwardly he
stayed far away and worked, his heart was full of Rama. Though Bharata thought that devotion to Rama consisted
in doing his duty, he still felt the need for the sandals. Without them, he could not bear the burden of kingship. He
did his duty, deriving his authority from the sandals. As Lakshmana was a bhakta of Rama, so too was Bharata. But
in appearance they differ. Though Bharata was firm in his loyalty to duty and principle he too needed the living
warmth of the symbol.
An example from the story of Krishna
24. The sap of Hari-bhakti, devotion to the Lord, is essential. Hence the Lord tells Arjuna again and again,
"mayyaasaktamanna paartha, - Arjuna, be devoted to me, rely on me, and so keep working." The refrain of the
Bhagavad Gita is "anaasakti," "nissangata" (non-attachment). It dislikes and avoids the very word "aasakti,"
attachment. It repeatedly insists that one should remain unattached while performing action, that one should act
without desire and without hatred, that one should act regardless of the fruit.
It is this Bhagavad Gita that says
here, "Arjuna, be attached to me." But here, we must remember that attachment to the Lord is a noble thing. It is
not like the attachment to any object in the world. Saguna and nirguna are closely interwound. Saguna can never be
removed from its nirguna ground. Nirguna needs the sap of saguna. A man who is ever busy doing his duty is
worshipping God through work. But the moisture, the rasa of love, should go into the worship. "maamanusmara
yuddhya cha" - "Work with me in mind."
Yes, work is pujaa, worship. But the bhavana within should be kept alive. The mere offering of flowers is not pujaa There must go with it bhavana, the appropriate inner attitude, Pujaa with flowers is one way of worship; doing good
actions is another way. But in both the
moisture of bhavana is essential. If when we offer flowers, there is no bhavana within, it is as if we are flinging
flowers on a mere stone.

Therefore the real thing is bhavana, the inward approach. Whether we make the approach through form or the
formless, through knowledge or devotion, through action or love it is essentially the same. The final experience
from one is the same as that from the other.
25. Look at Uddhava and Arjuna. I have taken a big jump from the Raamaayana to the Mahabhaarata. But then I
have a right to do this, for Rama and Krishna are both one. As Bharata stands to Lakshmana, so Arjuna does to
Uddhava.
Wherever Krishna is, there Uddhava has to be. He cannot bear even a moment's separation from
Krishna. He is ever absorbed in the service of Sri Krishna. Without Krishna, the whole world appears dull and
tasteless to him. Arjuna too was Krishna's friend, but he lived far away in Delhi. Arjuna was a servant of Krishna,
he was the doer of His work; but while Krishna was in Dvaraka, Arjuna was in Hastinapura. Such was their
relationship.
26. When it was time for Krishna to leave the body, he said to Uddhava, "Udho, I am going now." Uddhava pleaded,
"Won't you take me with you? Come, let us go together." But Krishna answered, "I am not for that. When the sun
sets, it leaves its brightness in fire; so let me leave my light with you." Thus the Lord made his final arrangements
and sent forth Uddhava with the light of jnana. Later, on his journey, Uddhava comes to know, through Rishi
Maitreya that the Lord had returned to His home in Vaikuntha.
But his heart did not grieve in the
least over the news, as if nothing had happened. You know the saying, "The master died and the pupil cried. The
teaching and the learning were both wasted!" Such was not the state of Uddhava. He did not feel that there was
any separation. All his life he had performed saguna worship and lived in the presence of the Lord. But now he had
begun to experience the joy even of nirguna. In this way he had traversed the path to nirguna.
Saguna may come first, but the next step of nirguna has to follow; otherwise there is no completeness.
27. Arjuna's state is just the opposite. What had Krishna asked him to do? He had entrusted to him the duty of
protecting the women after his life-time. Arjuna had gone from Delhi to Dvaraka and was returning with the ladies.
At Hissar, in the Punjab, on the way, some robbers stopped and plundered them. Arjuna was considered the most
valiant man of his age; he was famous as a hero. He was celebrated as Jaya, the
victorious; he had confronted Shiva face to face and made Him appreciate his might.
And this Arjuna, in the neighborhood of Ajmer, too to his feet and fled. Because he had parted from Krishna, his
mind was quite upset; it was as if he had lost his life. All that remained was an unsupported corpse. The fact is
that, Arjuna, the nirguna worshipper who had constantly performed karma and lived far away from Krishna, found
in the end that this separation was unbearable. His nirguna gave way at last under this stress. It was as if he had
come to the end of all karma. Saguna experience came at last to complete his nirguna bhakti. That is, saguna has to
go towards nirguna and nirguna has to come towards saguna. Thus each completes the other.
Both are one - personal experience
28. Therefore, when we begin to describe the difference between the saguna and the nirguna worshipper, it
becomes difficult. In the end, saguna and nirguna become one. Thourgh the stream of bhakti springs from the
saguna, it reaches nirguna in the end. Here is an old story. I had gone to Vaikom to observe the Satyagraha there. I
remembered the geographical fact that Shankaracharya's birth place was on the border of Malabar. I had a
feeling that Shankara's village, Kaladi, was somewhere near. I asked the Malayali gentleman who accompanied me.
He said, "It is some 10 or 12 miles from here.
Do you want to go there?" I said I did not. I was going to see the Satyagraha in progress, and it did not seem
proper to go elsewhere. So on that occasion I did not go to that village. Even now it seems to me that I was right in
not going there then. But that night, when I went to bed, that village of Kaladi and the image of Shankaracharya
stood before my eyes again and again. I could not sleep. That experience is still with me, as fresh today as it was
then. Again and again that night, I thought of Shankaracharya - of power of his jnana, his divine certitude in

advaita, the extraordinary glowing vairagya; non-attachment, which convinced him that samsara, this phenomenal
life was all false, of the majesty of his language and the boundless help I have received from him.
All night-long these images stood before me. Then I realized how nirguna is filled to the brim with saguna. Even
seeing him face to face would not have evoked such love. Even nirguna is filled with saguna. For the most part, I do
not write letters to friends to inquire about their welfare. But even when I do not write to a friend, the thought of
him is ever present, it fills my mind. Thus, saguna lies hidden in nirguna. Saguna and nirguna are indeed one. Placing
an image before us and worshipping it with visible outward service on one hand, and on the other, being constantly
concerned inwardly
with the world's welfare, while performing no outward acts of worship - both these have the same worth and value.
Therefore let us attain the qualities of the bhakta
29. Finally, we must admit that it is difficult to distinguish between what is saguna and what is nirguna. What
looks like saguna from one point of view may be nirguna from another. We worship saguna by placing a stone in
front of us and performing pujaa. In this stone we conceive the presence of God. In our mother and in saints, we
see the visible presence of chaitanya, the living spirit. In them jnana, love and warmth of heart shine clear.
But we do not regard them as the Supreme, we do not worship them. Such people, filled with the living spirit, are
seen by us all. We should, therefore, serve them; we should see in them the concrete manifestation of the
Supreme. And yet, instead of doing this, people prefer to see the Lord in a stone. To see Lord in a stone is in a
sense the ultimate limit of nirguna. In the saints, in one's parents, in one's neighbors, love and knowledge and
willingness to help are manifest.
It is easy to conceive the presence of God in them; but it is difficult to conceive it in a stone. The stone that lies in
the Narmadaa, we regard as Shiva. Is not this nirguna worship?
30. But, on the contrary, if we do not conceive the presence of God in the stone, where else can we concieve it? It
is only the stone that is fit to be the image of the Lord. It is motionless, full of peace. Light or darkness, heat or
cold, the stone remains the same. The motionless, passionless, stone is best fitted to be a symbol of the Lord.
Father, mother, neighbour, the people, all these are subject to passion and change. Therefore, in one sense, it
is more difficult to serve these than to serve the stone.
31. The truth of the matter is that saguna and nirguna complete each other. Saguna is easy and nirguna
difficult. But from another point of view, saguna is difficult and nirguna easy. Both these means take us to the
same end. The Fifth Chapter told us that yogi who works all the twenty-four hours of the day and yet does nothing
is the same as the sannyaasi who does nothing all the day and yet does everything.
Similarly, the state of action which is saguna and the yoga of sannyaasa which is nirguna, are the same. The
difficulty which the Lord faced in answering the question, "Is sannyaasa or yoga, renunciation or action better?"
the same difficulty the Lord faces here. Finally it became necessary to decide on the basis of which was easier and
which was more difficult. Otherwise action and renunciation, saguna and nirguna, are both the same.
32. In the end, the Lord says, "Arjuna! Whether you are saguna bhakta or a nirguna bhakta, it does not matter.
Only be a bhakta, and not a stupid stone." And after saying this, he describes the qualities of a bhakta. Nectar may
be sweet, but we have had no chance of tasting it. But the sweetness of these qualities we can taste for ourselves.
There is no need to imagine them. Let us experience these qualities. The qualities of the bhakta in the Twelfth
Chapter are - like those of the sthitaprajna in the Second Chapter - to be read everyday, reflected upon, and
brought into practice by stages so that our lives may gain strength. In this way we should little by little, turn our
lives towards God.
THE SELF AND THE NON-SELF
Distinguishing between body and soul helps karma-yoga

1. Vyaasadev has poured into the Bhagavad Gita the essence of his life. He has written many other long works. The
Mahaabhaarata alone contains a hundred or a hundred and twenty-five thousand slokas. In Sanskrit, the very word
Vyaasa has acquired the meaning of extensiveness. But, in the Gita, he did not pursue elaboration. As Euclid in his
"Elements of Geometry" states propositions and formulates principle, Vyaasadev, in the Gita, gives us the principles
useful for living.
In the Bhagavad Gita, there is no long discussion, nothing elaborate. The main reason for this is that everything
stated in the Gita is meant to be tested in the life of every man; it is intended to be verified in practice. Only what
is necessary for the conduct of life is set down in the Gita. Vyaasa's intention too was only this, and hence he was
content with a brief statement of principles. From this contentment we can see for ourselves how great was his
faith in truth and self-realization. When a thing is true, there is no need to use any arguments to substantiate it.
2. The main reason why we look constantly to the Gita is that, whenever we need help, we may get it from the Gita.
And, indeed, we always do get it. Because the Gita is a science applicable to life, it emphasizes svadharma. If there
is one strong support for man's life, it is the performance of svadharma. All the superstructure has to be built on
svadharma. The strength of the superstructure depends on the strength of the foundation. It is the performance
of svadharma that Gita calls karma.
Around this karma, which is the
performance of svadharma, the Gita arranges a number of other matters. To safeguard this, many vikarmas are
conceived. To give beauty to the performance of svadharma, to crown it with success, it should be given all the help
and support that it needs. That is why we have been considering many such aids so far. Many of them were in the
form of bhakti. Today, in the Thirteenth Chapter, we come to another aid in the performance of svadharma this is
related to the intellectual aspect.
3. The Gita stresses everywhere that the man who performs svadharma should give up the fruit. One must act, but
one must also renounce the fruit. Water the tree, tend it with care, but do not desire to enjoy its shade or fruit or
flower. This is karma yoga through the practice of svadharma. Karma-yoga does not mean merely the performance
of karma. Action takes place all the time, everywhere in creation. There is no need to tell it; but the karma that is
the performance of svadharma - not mere action, but acting well and renouncing the fruit - this is easy to say and
appears easy to understand, but it is very difficult to put into practice.
For it is considered that the motive force behind any action is the desire for fruit. To act without the desire for
fruit is to turn things upside down. It is the very opposite of the way the world proceeds. When a man works
unremittingly, we say that the karma-yoga of the Gita fills his life. We say that the life of a man who works
constantly is full of karma yoga, but this is an inaccurate use of language. All this is not karma-yoga as explained in
the Gita. Among millions of people who perform action - not mere action, but even action in the form of svadharma
- it is difficult to get a few who perform the karma-yoga of the Gita. A perfect karma-yogi - in the true and subtle
meaning of the Gita perhaps we shall never find. To perform karma and yet to give up its fruit is a most uncommon
thing. So far, the Gita has been making and maintaining just distinction.
4. Another distinction which reinforces this is given in the Thirteenth Chapter. The distinction between body and
spirit helps the separation of action from the desire for he fruit. This is set forth in the Thirteenth Chapter. The
figure which we see with our eyes, we call an image, a form, a body. But even after seeing with our eyes the outer
form, we still have to enter into the object and see it from within. We have to remove the armor, the outer skin of
the fruit and taste the pulp within. Even the coconut, one has to break to see what there is within.
Despite its rough sharp exterior, the jack-fruit is full of sweet juicy pulp. Whether we look at ourselves or others,
we have to distinguish the inside from the outside. Now, what is the significance of removing the skin? It means
that, in every object, the outer skin and the inner substance should be distinguished. Every object has two forms an outer body and an inner soul. This is also true of karma. The outer result is the body of karma. The inner purity
that results from karma is its soul.
Let us give up the body, the outward result of the performance of svadharma, and let us bear in our hearts the
essence of action, the soul which is inner purity. Let us acquire the habit of looking at things in this way, of seeing
everything in its essence, setting aside the body. To the eye, the heart and the mind we should give the exercise,

the training and the habit of such discrimination. In every thing we should leave aside the body and reverence the
soul. This distinction has been made in the Thirteenth Chapter for us to think about.
The fundamentals of growth
5. The habit of looking for the essence of things is noble indeed. If only we could acquire it from childhood
onwards, how good it would be! This is something that one should make one's own. It appears to many that
adhyaatmavidyaa, the science of the spirit, has no connection with ordinary life. Others feel that, even if such a
connection were possible, it is not desirable.
If we could arrange to train people from childhood onwards to distinguish between the body and the spirit, it would
be a matter for joy. This is a problem in the art of teaching. As a result of faulty education, the minds of children
today are filled with evil samskaras, wrong tendencies. This education does not carry us beyond the bounds of the
feeling, "I am only the body." The activities all relate to the body, and yet the quality that the body should attain,
the form that should be given to it, is found nowhere.
While thus vain worship, is offered to the body, no attention is paid to the joys of the soul. This condition has
resulted from the present system of education. Worship is offered day and night to the idol of the body. From
childhood we are taught to worship this deity, the body. If you hurt your foot, it is enough if you apply a little clay
to it. The child would be satisfied with this, might feel that even this treatment is unnecessary. He would think
nothing of a scratch or an abrasion, but not so his parents and guardians.
They would draw the child near and fuss over it, saying, "Oh dear! How badly you have hurt yourself! How did it
happen? Where did you fall?
What a deep cut? Look, its bleeding!" Even if the child is not crying, they make him cry. What is one to say of this
achievement? Children are constantly told not to jump about, or play, for fear of falling and getting hurt. They are
given one-sided education which teaches them to think only of the body.
6. Even when we praise or blame the child, it is in reference to the body. We say, "How dirty you are!" How it hurts
the child and how false is this identification of the child with the body! It is true that there is dirt and it is true
that it needs to be washed off. But instead of casually washing off the dirt form the body, why attack the child?
He cannot bear it. He becomes thoroughly miserable. While his heart, his innerself, is all purity and cleanliness, why
this wrong attribution of dirt? In reality, the child is far from dirty.
The child is the Lord Himself, absolute in his beauty, sweetness, holiness and love. In the child too He is manifest;
but we call the child dirty! What is the connection between him and dirt? Since the child does not understand this
at all he cannot bear this attack on him. He is deeply disturbed and such disturbance stands in the way of
improvement. Hence we should explain things clearly to him and keep him clean and tidy.
7. Instead of this, we impress on the child's mind the idea that he is the body. There is an important principle in
the art of teaching that we should recognize. The teacher should have the bhavana, the attitude, that the child is
beautiful in every way. If the pupil gives a wrong answer, he is slapped. What is the connection between the slap
and the error? If he comes late to school, a blow descends on him.
The blood rushes up to his face, but will that make him come earlier to school? Can this swifter flow of blood tell
him what the time is? To tell the truth, by such treatment, we only strengthen the animal in him. We confirm the
bhavana that he is the body. We build his life on the foundation of fear. If we really want him to improve, we
cannot do so by the use of force, which only heightens the body sense. One improves only when one realizes, "I am
different from the body."
8. There is no harm in being aware of one's defects either of the body or of the mind. The awareness helps one to
remove these defects. But one must understand clearly, that one is not the body. 'I' am altogether distinct from
the body, separate, entirely beautiful, bright, holy, free of imperfection. When a man examines himself to remove
his imperfection, he makes a distinction between himself and the body. So when others draw his attention to the
imperfections in him, he does not lose his temper.

Instead, he considers carefully the faults in the mechanism of
his body or mind and tries to set them right. On the contrary, a person who does not make this distinction between
the body and himself cannot improve himself at all. "This body, this lump of flesh, this image of clay, this is me" - if
a man thinks thus, how could he improve himself? Improvement becomes possible only when we begin to realize that
the body is given to us as a means, an instrument.
When someone points out that something is wrong with my charkha, do I get angry? On the contrary, and fault
found in it, I set right. The body too is exactly like this. The body is a tool with which to cultivate the field of the
Lord. If it gets out of order, it should, of course, be set right forthwith. The body being an instrument, we should
keep ourselves detached from it, and try to get rid of the defects in it. I am separate from this instrument; I am
its master and owner; I make it work and receive its noble service. From childhood onwards, we should cultivate
this attitude of remaining separate from the body.
9. As the spectator who stands apart from the game sees most clearly its merits and defects, it is only when we
stand aloof from the body, mind and intellect that we can observe the merits and defects in them. Some people
say, "My memory is getting feeble. Please tell me what to do about it." When a man says this, it is clear that he
looks on himself as different from his memory. He says, "My memory has become dull," as he might say of any
other of his instruments, that it has lost its quality.
One may mislay one's child, one may mislay one's book, but one cannot mislay oneself. When at the end he dies, the
body it utterly lost and turns to nothing, but he himself remains the same. He is whole, and free from all diseases.
This is a thing to understand. Once we understand this, we are released from many conflicts and difficulties.
ttachment to the body hinders life's progress
10. As a result of the widespread assumption that the body is oneself, man has thoughtlessly constructed for
himself a large variety of means for cherishing the body. The very sight of them is terrifying. Man's constant
concern is that the body is getting old, it is becoming thin and dry; and yet it must by some means be maintained.
But, after all, how long can you keep alive this body, this outer skin? It is only till death, isn't it?
When the fellow sergeant Death presents his warrant, can the body resist it for a moment? In the presence of
Death, all one's pride freezes. And yet, for the sake of this frail body, man accumulates innumerable means of
support. Day and night, he is anxious about his body. Nowadays, they say that there is no harm in eating meat to
preserve the body. The human body, then, is so precious that we should eat meat to preserve it. They say that the
animal's body is less precious.
Why? Why is the human body so precious? What is the reason? Can it be that the animal eats what it likes, that it
has no idea beyond satisfaction of needs? Man does not act like this. Man takes care of the creatures around him.
That is why the human body has value, that is why it is precious. But by eating meat we destroy that which makes
the human body precious. My good man, your greatness depends, does it not, on the fact that you live with selfcontrol, that you labor for the safety of all beings, that you
care for them and cherish them?
Is it not because of this quality in you, which is not found in animals that man is considered nobler? That is why it
is said that human birth is difficult to attain. But if we destroy the foundation of man's greatness and nobility, how
can the superstructure remain? If man too, without shrinking, behaves like any other animal and lives on flesh, it
would be like cutting off from the tree the branch on which one sits.
11. Medical science is performing many miracles today. Into the body of a living animal they inject disease germs
and watch its effects. The knowledge gained by giving all the pains to a living creature is used for the sake of the
worthless human body. And all this goes on the name of "compassion to creatures." Producing disease germs in the
animal's body we take out the serum for injecting into the human body. Many such terrible actions are being done.
This body, for whose sake we do so much, is as brittle as glass and will be shattered to pieces any moment. There is
no certainty how long it will last.

Thought all these efforts are for safe-guarding the human body, what do we find in actual experience? As we go on
trying to preserve the delicate human body, it goes on disintegrating. It is not as if we do not understand all this,
and yet keep trying to fatten it and make much of it.
12. We never consider what kind of food will make the mind saattvik, make it bright and clear. What one should do,
what aids one should seek to make the mind pure, the intellect clear, we never think. All that we think of is how to
increase the weight of our body.
Just as cowdung cakes fall off the wall when they are dry, this clay
plaster of our body disintegrates, leaving it as it was. What then is the use of adding to the body all this
unbearable weight of clay? Why make the body so fat? The body is a tool, and we should certainly do all that is
necessary to keep it fit. A machine should be made to work, it must be well used. But can one identify oneself with
the machine? And should we not think in the same way of this machine, the body?
13. The truth is that the body is not an end, but a means. Once we are confirmed in this attitude, all this fussing
over the body will cease. Life will present a different appearance to us. Then we would see no merit in decking the
body. Indeed a piece of ordinary cloth will do to cover it. We want the cloth to be soft and smooth, dyed in
beautiful colors, with good patterns and a border. For the sake of this, we make a number of people labor. What is
all this for? Does not the Creator know His job? If the body needs all these patterns, would He not have spent on
your body and mine the skill He has shown on the leopard's skin?
Was it beyond His powers? He could have fixed to our backs a magnificent tail like the peacock's. But the Lord has
made man's skin of a single color. The slightest spot on it spoils its beauty. Man is beautiful as he is. It is not God's
intention that it should be beautified further. Is it not Creation extraordinarily beautiful? All that man has to do
is to behold it with his eyes and be content. But he has missed his way. They say that Germany has destroyed our
colors. My dear man, the color of your heart was already dead. It is only then that you developed a taste for these
artificial dyes. As a result, you
have become dependent on others. You have been needlessly caught in this whirlpool of beautifying the body.
Cultivating the mind, developing the intellect, and making the heart beautiful - these have been neglected!
"That thou art"
14. Therefore the thought that the Lord gives us in the Thirteenth Chapter is most valuable. "You are not the
body, you are the Self" "Tat tvam asi" - "You are indeed the Self." This thought, this saying is most noble, pure and
holy. This great truth - "You are not this outer covering, this skin, but the true indestructible fruit within" - finds
an important place in Sanskrit literature.
The moment there arises in the mind of man the thought - "That are you," "I am not this body, I am the Self
Supreme" - a new joy, unknown before, wells up in the heart. These words that spring from the heart are filled
with the subtle thoughts, "Nothing, no one, in the world can destroy this
form of mine."
15. I am the Self, indestructible, flawless, transcending the body. The body has been given to me for the sake of
the Self. Whenever there is a chance of the Supreme principle being defiled, I shall in order to safeguard it,
throw away this body. I shall ever be ready to offer up the body in sacrifice in order to keep the flame of the Self
brightly burning. Is it to compass my own defeat that I am riding the body? I must hold sway over the body, I shall
put it to good use; through it I shall increase the welfare and prosperity of the world.
"I shall fill the three worlds
with joy." For the sake of a great ideal, I shall throw away the body, shouting "Victory to the Lord." The rich man,
when his clothes become a little dirty throws them away and puts on new ones. I shall treat the body in the same
way. It is needed for work. But when it becomes useless for the purpose, why should I hesitate to cast it aside?

16. This too is the lesson we learn from satyagraha. The body and the Self are two different things. The day a man
discovers this secret, his real education, his real growth begins. It is only then that satyagraha will succeed.
Therefore it is necessary for each one of us to impress this bhavana in our hearts.
The body is only a means, an occasion, an instrument given by the Lord. The day the need for it ceases, it must be
thrown away. In summer we put away our warm winter wear; in the morning we lay aside the blankets we use at
night; we remove in the evening the clothes we wore in the morning. We should regard the body in the same light.
As long as the body is useful, we should keep it; but when it is no more useful, we should fling it aside. The Lord
teaches us this device to help the growth of the soul.

An end to tyranny
17. So long as we do not realize that we are distinct from the body wicked people will tyrannize over us and enslave
us. There is no knowing what injury they will do t us. It is because of fear that tyranny becomes possible. A
raakshasa caught hold of a man, and made him work for him ceaselessly. If he paused a little, the threatened him
saying, "I shall eat you up. I shall destroy you." At first the man was afraid, but when he could stand it no longer,
he said, "All right eat me up if you want to."
But how could the raakshasa afford to eat him up? What he wanted was a servant, a slave. If he were eaten up,
who would do the work? The raakshasa was merely threatening. When he got the reply. "All right eat me up," his
power came to an end. Tyrants know that their subjects cling to the body. By inflicting pain on the body, they
enslave and control others. But when you give
up attachment to the body, you become an emperor, you achieve freedom. All power comes into your hands.
No one can exercise authority over you. The very basis of tyranny breaks down. For the basis of tyranny is the
bhavana, "I am the body." Knowing that through suffering inflicted on the body they can tyrannize over others,
they use threatening language.
18. "I am the body" - this bhavana of mine arouses in others the desire to tyrannize, to inflict pain. But what did
the great English martyr Cranmer say? "If you would burn me, by all means, do. Here, burn this right hand first,
for this hand hath offended." In the same way, Latimer said, "Be of good comfort, Master Ridley, and play the man.
We shall this day light such a candle by God's Grace in England as (I trust) shall never be put out." Who could burn
such men? They lit a fire a dharma which no one can put out. Their task was to burn this candle of the body and
spread everywhere the light of truth.
19. Socrates was sentenced to death by poison. He said then, "I am old. This body is due to be destroyed in a short
while. What valour do you show by destroying that which is about to perish?
Consider, some day the body has to die. Where is the credit in killing that which is mortal?" The night before he
was to drink hemlock and die, he taught his pupils about immortality of the soul. He described with zest the
effects the poison would have on the body, He did not shrink from it the least. As soon as he finished speaking of
the immortality of the soul, one
of his pupils asked him, "What rites would you like us to perform when you are no more?" He replied, "How
wonderful! They will kill me and you will bury me!
Those who kill me are my enemies, and you who bury me are my great friends! They kill me cleverly and you bury me
cleverly! Who are you to bury me? I am as clever as you.
Where will you bury me? In the earth or in the tomb? No one can kill me, and no one can bury me. Has all my
teaching been in vain? The Self is immortal. Who can kill it, who can bury it?" And, indeed, for twenty-five
centuries, this great man Socrates has been standing aloft, watching every one else being buried!

Faith in the power of the Supreme Self
20. No true safety is possible so long as there is attachment to the body and consequent fear. There is only a
sense of insecurity. When one shuts one's eyes there i a fear that a snake might bite one or robbers might attack.
One sleeps with a stick by one's side. If you ask why, you are told, "It is good to have it there, a thief might turn
up." My dear man, what if the thief take up that stick and hits you on your head? It is as if you are keeping a stick
ready in case the thief forgets to bring one. What gives you the courage to go to sleep?
At this moment you are in the hands of the world. It is only when you are awake that you can protect yourself. Who
guards you when you sleep?
21. I go to sleep trusting to some power. I sleep trusting to the same power that protects the tiger and the cow
when they sleep. Even the tiger goes to sleep. Even the tiger, which being at enmity with the world is constantly
looking back, goes to sleep. If it had no faith in that power, it would be necessary to make an arrangement for some
tigers to keep watch while others sleep. The power trusting to which the lion and the tiger and the wolf go to
sleep, that power pervades all creation, an in its lap, I too am asleep.
The child sleeps, free from care, on his mother's lap. He is then the emperor of the world. You and I should train
ourselves to sleep in the lap on the universal mother in love and trust and knowledge. I should become better
acquainted with the power by which all my life proceeds. I should understand it more and more clearly. The more I
trust to it, the more secure I will be. The more I experience this power, the more I grow. In the Thirteenth
Chapter, something is shown of the steps of this progress.
Progressive Realization of the Supreme Self
22. So long as the thought of the Self within the body does not arise, man is a absorbed in ordinary activities.
When hungry he eats, when thirsty he drinks, when drowsy he falls off to sleep - he knows nothing beyond these.
For these he fights. The thought in his mind is how to get these things. In this way he is immersed in activities
relating to the body. Progress begins only later. All this time, the Self remains merely watching.
Like a mother watching her baby crawling near the well, with the same care, the Self watches us. Quietly, it
watches all these activities. This is called the stage of the "upadrashtaa", the witness watching.
23. In this state, the Self watches without assenting. But the jiva the soul which till now acted in all things
identifying itself with the body, wakes up. The knowledge suddenly dawns upon it that it has been living like an
animal. When the soul begins to think like this, the foundations of ethics are laid. It examines every issue asking.
"Is it right? Is it wrong?" It starts exercising the power of discrimination. The power of analysis develops. It
stops acting merely on selfish impulse. Discipline takes the place of self-indulgence.
24. When the soul thus enters the domain of ethics, the self does not merely stand aside and watch. It
expresses approval from within saying, "Well done!" Now it ceases to be merely an "upadrashtaa," a witness, and
becomes an "anumantaa," one who assents and approves.
A hungry man comes to your door when you have just sat down to eat. You give the food away to him. When, late at
night, what you did comes back to your mind, you hear the still small voice of the Self saying, "You have done well."
When the mother pats her child on the back and says, "Well done, my child!" he has the feeling that he has gained
the world. Even so the approving voice of the Self within fills pleasure and plants its feet firmly on the path of
right conduct.
25. Then we come to the next stage. Through doing his duty, man tries to cleanse his mind and heart. But as he
does this, a point is reached when he gets tired. Then the soul begins to pray, "Oh Lord! I have come to the end of
my efforts. Give me more strength, more power. " Until a man realizes that he cannot achieve success by his own
efforts, however hard, he cannot understand the secret of prayer. When he has put all his strength into his
efforts and finds them inadequate, he should call on the Supreme with a sad and yearning heart, as Draupadi did.

The stream of the Lord's compassion and succor flows ceaselessly. Whoever is thirsty can drink of it as of right;
whoever has need, can seek fulfillment there. This is the relationship in the third stage. The Supreme now comes
very close. He comes running now to help and does not merely offer words of praise. .
26. A first, the Lord stood at a distance. As the teacher, giving his pupil a question to answer, stands aside and
watches, so too, as long as the soul adheres to the life of pleasure, the Supreme stands apart and says, "All right,
play your pranks."
Then the jiva, enters the sphere of ethics. Now the Supreme can remain neutral no longer. When he sees that good
things are happening through the jiva, the Lord looks in and says, "Well done!" When through such good actions the
grosser faults of the mind are removed, and the time come for cleansing the subtle impurities, the man finds all
his efforts are inadequate, he calls on the Lord for help. Then He answers the calls and comes running.
Whenever the bhakta's strength is found wanting, He comes and stands before him. Suryanarayana (the Lord in
the form of the Sun), the sergeant of the whole world, is ever standing at you door. He will not break open a closed
door and enter, for he is a servant. He gives the respect due to the master. He will not knock. The master sleeps
within, and so the servant Sun stands waiting outside. But let the door be opened even so little, he will enter will all
his brightness and drive away the darkness. So too is God.
Ask for his help and he will come with his arms outstretched. On the banks of the river Bhima in Pandharpur, He
stands ready with his hands on his hips. Tukaram and others describe Vitthal as ready to save, with arms
outstretched. Through the open nostril the air rushes in. Through the open door, the light come flooding in. But
even this comparison with air and light is not good enough. The Lord is nearer to us than they. He is more eager to
help us. He is upadrashtaa, the witness and the anumantaa, the one who assents, but He is also, in every, the
bhartaa, the support.
When we are unable to purify the mind and cry helplessly, "My life is in your hands, Oh Lord; save me!" or pray,
"You are my sole helper, I need your support." how can He, who is all compassion, stand aside? The Lord, the helper
of the devotee, He who makes perfect all that is incomplete, comes running
to us. Then he washes hides for Raidas, sells meat for the butcher Sajan, weaves cloth for Kabir, and grinds at the
stone with Janabai.
27. The next stage is to dedicate to the Lord even the fruit of action, which we receive by His grace. At this
stage, the jiva says to the Lord, "The fruit is yours, enjoy it." Naamadev sat down obstinately insisting, "Lord, you
have to drink this milk." What a lovely situation! The milk which is the result of all action, he dedicates to the
Lord! In this way, all the earnings and savings of his life, he dedicates to the Lord, to whose grace he owes them.
When Dharmaraaj was about to set foot in heaven, the dog that was with him was not allowed to enter.
Then Dharmaraaj renounced in one instant all the merits he had accumulated in a lifetime - the right to heaven. In
the same way, the bhakta gives over to the Lord all the fruits of action. The Lord who was upadrashtaa, anumantaa,
bhartaa, has now become the bhoktaa, the enjoyer. The jiva has now reached the state when, through his body, the
Lord enjoys pleasure.
28. Hereafter, one must give up making samkalpa, forming resolutions. There are three stages in action. First we
make a resolve, then we act, and finally the fruit comes to us. The fruit that through the grace of the Lord came
from the action, even that has been given over to the Lord. He who does the action is the Lord. He who tastes the
fruit is the Lord. Now, let the resolve too be made by the Lord. In this way let the beginning, the middle and the
end of action be filled with the Lord.
Jnanadev says, "The water flows without demur wherever the
gardener turns it. Let us be like this water always." The water nourishes the flower plant or the fruit tree at the
biddings of the gardener. In the same way, let the Lord decide what action should take place through my hands. Let
me entrust to Him the responsibility for all the resolves of my mind. When I have put all my weight on the horse,
why carry a few things on my head? Why not put them too on the horse's back?

Even if I carry on my head, does not the horse that cries me carry that burden too? Why not then put all the
weight on the horse's
back? In this way, all the agitations, the dance and the play of life, all the growth, becomes in the end of the
Lord's own. He becomes indeed the maheshvara, the Great Lord, of my life. Growing in this way, all one's life is
filled with God.
Only the curtain of the body remains. When that is removed, jiva and Siva, the soul and the Supreme Self become
one.
29. Thus,
"Upadrashtaa anumantaa cha bhartaa bhoktaa maheshvarah"
"The Lord is the witness, the assentor, the support, the enjoyer."
Thus progressively we should learn to experience the Lord. At first, the Lord watches as an impartial witness. Then
when the life of morality begins, He encourages us when good things take place through us. When the devotee
discovers that his own efforts are inadequate to cleanse the subtler impurities of the mind, and calls on Him, this
Helper of the helpless rushes to his aid.
After this, we have to give over to the Lord the fruits of action,
and make Him the Enjoyer. And, in the end, we should surrender to Him the right to resolve and thus fill all our life
with Him. This is the ultimate goal of man, which the saadhaka, the seeker, has to reach flying on the twin wings of
karma-yoga and bhakti-yoga, of action and devotion.
Humility, sincerity and other basic means to jnana
30. To achieve all this, the firm foundation of the practice of morality is indispensable. We should discriminate
between truth and falsehood, and follow only truth. We should discriminate between the essential and the nonessential and hold fast to the essential. We should throw away the shell and keep the pearl. In this way we
should begin life. Then with the help of one's own efforts and the grace of God, one should make further
progress.
If throughout this process we practice discrimination between the body and Self, it would be a help. At such times
I call to mind the sacrifice of Jesus. They were hammering nails into his body. It is said that then the words came
out of His mouth, "My god, my god, why hast Thou forsaken me?" But soon Lord Jesus collected Himself and said,
"Thy will be done, Lord forgive them for they know not what they do."
There is a great secret in this. This shows clearly how far the Self should be separated from the body. What the
goal should be, and how
near to it we can get, we can learn from the life of Jesus. We reach the point where we see the body being peeled
off like armor, like the skin of a fruit. Whenever I think of how the spirit should be distinguished from the body,
the life of Jesus and this final scene appear before my eyes. How do be quite other than the body, how to
sever the link with it, this the life of Christ shows us clearly.
31. Until we acquire the power to discriminate between truth and falsehood, it is not possible to distinguish
between the body and the Self. This discrimination, this knowledge, should pervade every fibre of our being. The
word "jnana", we take to mean, "to know." But to know with the mind is not jnana, true knowledge. To stuff one's
mouth with food is not the same as eating. The food in the mouth should be masticated, passed through the gullet
into the stomach, digested, converted into blood, and circulated throughout the body to nourish it.
Only then will it become real food. In the same way, mere knowledge of the mind in unavailing. That knowledge
should pervade all one's life and flow through one's heart. It should express itself through the hands and the feet,
the eyes and every other member. One should attain a state when all the organs of perception and action work
from knowledge. Therefore, in the Thirteenth Chapter, the Lord has given a beautiful description of jnana. The
mark of this jnana are like those of sthitaprajna - humility, sincerity, ahimsa, straightness, forgiveness.

Twenty such qualities, the Lord enumerates. He does not merely say that these qualities are called Jnana, he says
clearly that their opposites are ajnana. The means to jnana, are themselves jnana. Socrates regarded good qualities
as themselves jnana. The means and the end are identical.
32. These twenty means mentioned in the Gita, Jnanadev makes into eighteen. These are described in the Gita in
five slokas; but Jnanadev in his Jnaneshwari describes them lovingly in 700 ovis (verses). He was eager that these
good qualities should spread through society, that the power of the Lord who is Truth should prevail. He has put all
his experience into the description of these qualities. This has been of inestimable help to the Marathi-speaking
people.
These qualities pervaded Jnanadev's life. A blow that fell on a buffalo caused a swelling on Jnanadev's back. He
had such compassion and fellow-feeling for all creatures. It is out of this compassionate heart of Jnanadev that
the Jnaneshwari, his commentary on the Gita, emerged. He has analyzed these qualities thoroughly. We should read
his description of these qualities, meditate on them and receive them into our hearts.
I consider myself fortunate in being able to enjoy this in Jnanadev's sweet language. I shall deem it my good
fortune to be born again if my tongue can utter this sweet language of his. The substance is that we should make
our lives grow more and more by distinguishing the body from the spirit and trying to fill our being with God.
THE GUNAS - BUILDING UP AND BREAKING DOWN Analysis of nature
1. Brothers, this Fourteenth Chapter is one sense completes the Thirteenth. As a matter of fact, the Self has no
need to do anything. It is complete in itself. The natural movement of one's soul is upwards. But just as any object
is dragged down when a heavy weight is tied to it, the burden of the body drags down the soul. We saw in the last
Chapter that, if by some means we could separate body and soul, we shall progress. This may be very difficult, but
the results too are great.
If we could only snap the fetters of the body that bind the feet of the soul, we shall experience a great joy. Then
we shall not be miserable because of the body's sufferings. We shall become free. If a man achieves victory over
this body, who in the world can exercise power over him? He who rules himself rules over the whole world.
Therefore, remove the domination of the body over the soul. The pleasures and pains of the body are all alien and
do not belong to us. Between them and the Self there is not the slightest connection.
2. To what extent we should keep all these pains and pleasures separate from ourselves, I illustrated form the
story of Jesus. He has shown us that, even when the body is breaking, the mind can be kept in peace and joy. But
this separation of the body from the Self is the result not only of discrimination, but of self-control. Tukaram
speaks of the strength of vairagya (non-attachment) in association with viveka (discrimination).
Both are necessary. Vairagya, non-attachment, is itself a kind of self-control, a kind of renunciation. The
Fourteenth Chapter describes the directions in which we should exercise self-control. The oars propel the boat,
but the rudder, direct it. The oars and the rudder are both needed. In the same way, for separating the Self from
the pains and pleasure of the body, both discrimination and self-control are needed.
3. Just as the physician examines the patient's body and prescribes medicine, the Lord in the Fourteenth Chapter
examines and analyses the whole of nature and diagnoses its maladies. Here nature has been neatly classified.
There is a principle of division in statecraft. If you can divide the forces of the enemy in front of you, you can
readily gain victory. The Lord does the same here. In you and me, in all beings, in all things moving and unmoving,
nature is made up of three strands.
Just as there are three things in ayurveda, kapha (phlegm), pitta (bile) and vata (wind), nature is made up of three
gunas - sattva, rajas and tamas. Everywhere there is a mixture of these three. A little more here and a little less
there, that's all the difference. If we separate the Self from these three, we can separate it from the body. To
examine and conquer these three gunas, is itself the way of separation the Self from the body. Throught selfcontrol one should conquer these, one by one, until the approaches in the end the most important thing, that which
is beyond the gunas.

The cure for tamas - bodily labor
4. Let us take tamas first. In the condition of modern society, we see terrible manifestations of tamas. Its chief
manifestation is laziness. From this spring sleep and neglectfulness. Laziness, sleep and neglectfulness, if we have
overcome these, we may take it that we have conquered tamas. The most terrible of these is laziness. The best of
men may be ruined by it. It is an enemy which will destroy all the peace and happiness of society. It corrupts
everyone, from the lowest to the highest. It spares no one. It lies in wait to pounce upon us.
At the slightest opportunity it comes and settles within us. A little more food than usual, and it drives us to our
beds. If we sleep a little too much, our eyes are dull with sloth. As long as we have not overcome this laziness, all
our efforts are in vain. But then we look eagerly forward to laziness. Our desire is that we should work day and
night for a while, and save up some money so that we may spend the rest of our lives in leisure. The purpose of
earning a lot of money is to prepare for a life of laziness later. We generally believe that leisure is necessary in old
age. But this is mistake. If we lead our life in the right way, we should be working even in old age. With increasing
experience, our usefulness should also increase. Is that the time to seek rest?
5. We must take good care that laziness has no chance. King Nala was a great man and was very particular about
cleanliness. And yet they say once when he washed his feet he left a little spot dry, and Kali (the evil spirit)
entered through it.
King Nala was absolutely pure, clean in every way, but he left a tiny part of his body unwashed. And because of this
touch of laziness, Kali entered into him. But we expose the whole body. Laziness can enter in anywhere it likes.
When the body is lazy, the mind and intellect are lazy too. Society today is built on this laziness. A great deal of
misery has arisen from this. If we could cure this laziness, much, if not the whole of this misery could be removed.
6. At present, everywhere, there is talk of social reform. We are constantly discussing the minimum comfort the
common man should have, and the structure of society necessary to bring this about. On the one hand, there is
excessive comfort, and on the other extreme privation. On the one side wealth is piled up and for the rest there is
a bottomless depth of poverty. How can we remove these vast inequalities in society? There is only one natural way
for everyone to get the necessaries of life; that is for everyone to shake of laziness and work hard. Most of our
misery arises from laziness. If all were to resolve to work with their bodies, this misery will be no more.
But what do we see in society today? On one side, men grow rusty and useless; the limbs and senses of the rich are
eaten up with rust because they are never used. On the other side are bodies worn thin by unremitting toil. But the
tendency in society is for everybody to try and escape from bodily labor. Even those who work hard do so without
cheer.
They do so because there is no help for it. Those who are educated and intelligent make all sorts of excuses for
avoiding labor. Some say, "Why waste time in bodily labor?" But no one asks, "Why waste time in sleeping and
eating?" When we are hungry we eat. When we are sleepy we sleep. But when the question of bodily labor arises, we
ask, "Why waste our time? Why give so much trouble to the body? We are doing enough work, are we not, with our
minds?" My dear sir, you talk of working with the mind, then, why not eat with the mind and sleep with the mind?
Why not be content with mental sleep and mental food?
7. Thus there are two classes of men in society - those who work day and night and kill themselves, and those who
do not lift a little finger. A friend of mine once said to me, "Some are heads and some are trunks." On the one
hand, we have headless bodies, and on the other bodiless heads. The trunks merely labor, while the heads merely
think. Society has come to consist of Rahus and Ketus, heads and trunks. But if in reality they were separate heads
and trunks, it would not matter. For then some mutual arrangement could be made, as in the story of the blind man
and the lame man. The lame could lead the blind and the blind could carry the lame.
But the heads and trunks do not really form different groups. Everybody has both a head and trunk. This
combination of head and trunk is found everywhere. What then shall we do? Every one must shake of laziness.

8. And to shake off laziness one must perform bodily labor; this is the only way to conquer laziness. If we fail to do
this, we cannot but receive due punishment from Nature. We have to endure it in the form of sickness and other
miseries. Since we have the body, we must use it for labor. The time spent on such labor is not wasted. It does
yield result; we have sound health; our minds become bright and keen and pure. In the ideas of many thinkers we
see reflected their colics and head-aches.
If these thinkers would work under the sun, in open air, in the presence of Nature, their ideas would be strong and
bright. Experience shows that just as the mind is influenced by bodily sickness, so also good health has a bearing on
mind. Instead of contacting tuberculosis and then going to Bhuvali and other health resorts in the mountains in
search of sunlight and pure air, why not dig with a spade in the open, or water the garden or hew wood with an axe
and keep healthy?

Another cure for tamas
9. The first thing is to conquer laziness; the second is to conquer sleep. Sleep is in reality something sacred. The
slumber of the saints who fall asleep, who work till they tire themselves out, is in itself a kind of yoga. Such deep
and peaceful sleep comes only to the fortunate. Sleep must be deep and peaceful and undisturbed. The value of
sleep does not consist in its duration. Sleep does not depend on the length of the bed or the period during which
the person lay on it.
The deeper the well, the sweeter and purer is its water. So too, though one may sleep for a short while, if it is
deep, it does good. It is better to study with concentration for half an hour than to look at a book for three hours
with a wandering mind. Sleep too is like that. It cannot be said that long sleep is always beneficial. The sick man lies
on his bed all the twenty-four hours of the day. Though he clings to the bed, sleep does not approach him. Only
deep dreamless sleep is true sleep. Whatever the tortures of Yama after death may be, the tortures of one who
cannot sleep and is troubled by dreams are certainly indescribable. In the Veda, the rishi in his fear prays,

"paraa duhsvapnyam suva"
"I do not want, I do not want this terrible sleep." Sleep is meant to give rest, but if even in sleep all kinds of dream
and cares trouble us, where are we to find rest?
10. How then are we to get deep, undisturbed sleep? The means to shake off laziness will serve here too. We
should give ceaseless work to the body. Then the moment we get into bed, we will sleep like a corpse. Indeed sleep
is a brief death. To attain this beautiful death we should make due preparation by day. The body must be
thoroughly tired out by toil. The English poet Shakespeare says, "Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown." One
reason for it is that a king does not work with his body.
He who drowses by the day will have to keep vigil at night. Not to use the mind and body by day, what is this but
drowsing? Later, when it is time for the sleep, the mind is troubled by thoughts, and the body misses the pleasure
of real sleep. Then he sleeps late. If this life which should be used for attaining the highest ends is consumed by
sleep, when and how can we ever reach those? If half our life is spent in sleep, what good then do we get out of
life?
11. When much time is consumed in sleep, the third defect of tamas arises, namely negligence and error. The mind
of the drowsy man cannot be strong or vigilant. For this comes inattention. Too much sleep leads to laziness and
laziness to forgetfulness. Forgetfulness is an enemy of the spirit. Even in worldly affairs; forgetfulness causes
nothing but harm. But in our society, forgetfulness is regarded as quite natural.
No one thinks it is a great fault. We make an appointment with somebody, and we don't go on time. When asked, we
say, "Good Lord, I forgot!" Both the speaker and the hearer are satisfied with this explanation. It looks as though
people think that there is no remedy for forgetfulness. But this forgetfulness does harm in practical as well as in
spiritual matters. It is, in truth, a grave sickness. The canker consumes the mind and our life becomes hollow.

12. The laziness of the mind is the cause of forgetfulness. If the mind is alert, it cannot become forgetful. The
recumbent mind cannot save itself from the disease of forgetfulness. Hence the Lord Buddha says,

"pamaado machchuno padam"
Negligence, forgetfulness, is death itself. To get rid of this forgetfulness, we should conquer laziness and sloth.
Work with your body. Be always alert. Let every action proceed from deep thought. Nothing should ever be done
without thinking. Think before you act and think also after you act. Before and after action, everywhere, the Lord
in the form of thought should stand beside us. If we acquire the habit, the disease of inattention will leave us. All
our time should thus be regulated in the right way. If we keep an account of every moment, laziness cannot break
into our life. It is in this way that we should try to conquer tamas.
The cure for rajas - Living within the limits of svadharma.
13. After dealing with tamas, we should come to grips with rajas. Rajas too is a terrible foe. This is only another
aspect of tamas; it would be true to say that both these words stand for the same thing. After long sleep the body
is restless, and after much movement it longs to stretch itself on the bed. From tamas proceeds rajas, and from
rajas, tamas. Where one is present, you may take it that the other will be found too. Like bread in the oven with
the flames below and the embers above, man is caught between rajas and tamas. Rajas says, "Come here, I shall
toss you towards tamas" and tamas says, "Come here, I shall throw you to rajas." Thus rajas and tamas help each
other to ruin men. Just as the football is destined to be kicked about on all sides, man's life is spent in receiving
the kicks of rajas and tamas.
14. The chief mark of rajas is the desire to do all sorts of things, an overweening ambition to do superhuman deeds.
Through rajas we conceive a limitless desire for action, a consuming greed. Then we become unable to control the
rush of our instincts and passions. We wish to remove the mountain here and fill up the lake there. We are impelled
to drain the water from the sea and to submerge the deserts of the Sahara. We think of digging a Suez Canal or a
Panama Canal.
We are never at peace unless we are breaking and mending. This is just like a child cutting up a piece of paper and
making it into something else. Mixing this with that, drowning one thing in another, making something fly, changing
one thing into another - these are the endless games played by rajas. "The bird flies in the air. Why should I not
fly too? The fish lives in the water. Why should I not make submarine and live in water too? Thus, having got a
human body, we find satisfaction in competing with bird and fish.
Man wants to migrate to other bodies and experience their fun. Someone says, "Come, let us go to Mars and see
how people live there." The mind wanders all the time, as if innumerable desires, like so many demons, possess it.
We cannot bear to see things being where they are. We need some commotion, some excitement. We think, "when
with all my greatness, I am here, how could creation remain what it has always been?" We behave like a wrestler
who, through excess of energy dashes against a wall and kicks against a tree. Such excitement springs from rajas.
Under its influence man burrows deep into the earth, brings out from its bowels a few stones and calls them rubies
and diamonds. Possessed by the same agitation, he dives into the sea and, bringing up the rubbish from the depths,
calls it a pearl. But because it has no hole, he pierces one through it. Now, where it is to be worn? So he gets the
goldsmith to pierce his nose and ears for him. Why does man fuss about in the fashion? All this is due to the power
of rajas.
15. Another effect of rajas is absence of steadiness. Rajas desires immediate results. When a slight obstruction
is met with, the man give up the path he has chosen and takes to another. The man of rajas is ever busy taking up
and abandoning things. He changes his mind every day. And in the end he finds himself empty-handed.
raajasam chalam adhruvam.
All the acts of the man of rajas are restless and uncertain. He is like the child who plants a seed and, a little later,
digs it up again to see if it has sprouted. He expects results then and there. He has neither confidence nor
equanimity. He does not know how to plant his feet firmly. He does some work here; he gets some fame there; then

he goes off to a third place which is neither here nor there. Today a reception in Madras, tomorrow in Calcutta and
the day after in Bombay or Nagpur. His ambition is to get civic addresses from every municipality in the land. He
sees glory everywhere. But staying in a place and doing some steady work, that is not his way. The state of the
rajasik man is thus really terrible.
16. Under the influence of rajas, man indulges in all sorts of activities. For him, there is nothing like svadharma.
The true pursuit of svadharma means the giving up of other activities. The karma-yoga of the Gita is Ramabaana,
the arrow of Rama, for destruction of rajas. Everything about rajas is restless, unsteady.
If the rain falling on a mountain-top runs in all directions, it disappears, leaving no trace behind; the water is
scattered and wasted. But when the same water flows in one direction, it becomes a river. A power springs from it.
It brings blessing to the land. So too, if a man does not scatter his energies in all sorts of efforts, but collects
them and applies them in orderly fashion to a single task only then can some good action take shape through his
hands. Hence there is great value in svadharma.
We should think constantly of our svadharma and devote all our energies to it; we should have no thought for
anything else. This is the touchstone of svadharma. Karma-yoga is not action which is great or weighty. The karmayoga of the Gita is something quite different. Its distinctive virtue consists in progressively acquiring
chittashuddhi, inner purity, through performing, without any thought of fruit, the svadharma that comes to one
naturally and inescapably.
Endless activities go on all the time throughout creation. But karma-yoga means performing all actions with a
special mental attitude. To sow seed in a field and to scatter a handful of grain somewhere - these are entirely
distinct actions. The difference between them is great; we know how much we gain by sowing the seed and what we
lose by throwing it away. The karma that the Gita teaches is like the sowing of seed. There is an unlimited power in
carrying out one's duty, one's svadharma. Here, no effort can be too great, there is no excuse for running around.
How to determine one's svadharma?
17. "How is then svadharma to be determined?" If some one asks this, the easy answer would be, "It comes
naturally of itself." It is born into the world with us. The very idea of going in search of it is strange. When a man
is born, his svadharma too is born with him. As a child has no need to go in search of his mother, no none need go in
search of svadharma. It is ours, right from the beginning.
The world was there before we were born; it will be there when we are no more. The mighty stream flowed before
we were born into it and it will flow after we are gone. The service of the parents to whom I was born, the service
of the neighbors amongst whom I find myself, these duties come to me naturally. Then my other obligations are
matters of everyday experience. I feel hungry, I feel thirsty. So to give food to the hungry and drink to the
thirsty becomes my duty, by nature.
Hence, it is never necessary to go in search of svadharma, or some form of service or compassion. Wherever there
is a search for svadharma, one may be certain that some paradharma or adharma is going on, that some one else's
duty or some wrong action is being performed. The servant need not go in search of service; it comes to him
unsought. But one thing he should remember; that is, that everything that comes to him without an effort on his
part is not necessarily right. A farmer comes to me at night and says, "Come, let us shift that bound a few feet
away.
That will make my field larger. There is no one there now. We can do it unnoticed." Although this task is assigned
to me by my neighbour and comes of its own accord, it is not to be regarded as my duty, for it harbors, asatya,
falsehood.
18. The reason why I like the system of four varnas is that both naturalness and dharma are found in it. If you give
up svadharma, nothing will be gained. Only those who happen to be my parents will be my parents. I may say that I
do not like them, but then, what can be done about it? The parent's calling is naturally followed by the son. It is

the distinguishing feature of the varna system that the trade pursued by one's ancestors - if it is not opposed to
morality - should be continued and developed. This system has now fallen into decay.
Today it has become difficult to uphold it. But it would be an excellent thing if only we could reform and revive it.
Today the first 25 or 30 years of a man's life are spent in learning a new job, a new trade. After learning it, the
man goes in search of a place to serve in, to work in. Thus between what he learns in the first 25 years and his
actual life there is no connection. They say that he is preparing for his later life. This amounts to saying that while
he is learning he is not alive. Apparently, life is to come later! One is to learn everything first and begin to live
afterwards, as if living and learning are two entirely different things! But if this is not related to life, should we
not call it death?
While the average Indian's expectation of life is 23 years, here we are spending 25 years in just preparing for
living. In this way a lifetime is spent in learning a trade. Then the actual practice of the trade begins. In the result,
the most energetic and enthusiastic years of our life are wasted. The energy and enthusiasm which should be used
in the service of mankind and enrichment of life run to waste. Life is not mere play. But it makes one sad to think
that the first and most valuable part of life is spent in searching for a means of livelihood. It is for this reason
that Hinduism has discovered for us the system of varna.
19. Let us leave aside the system of four varnas. In every country, even where this system does not obtain, every
one has his own svadharma. All of us are born into the stream, bringing with us our own special circumstances, the
duty called svadharma comes into being naturally. We should not therefore adopt distant duties - it is wrong even
to call them duties - however noble they may appear. Often it is distance that lends enchantment to the view. Man
is drawn by distant objects. Thick mist may surround a man where he stands. But his eyes do not see it.
He points to a distant spot and says. "Look, there is thick mist there." Though there is mist everywhere, we do not
see the mist just about us. Distance has an attraction for man. What is by his side, lies neglected in a corner and
he has dreams of what is far away. But this is a delusion and it must be abandoned. Though the svadharma that is
mine in commonplace, incomplete and uninteresting, yet because it is mine, it is the best for me. It is the most
beautiful to me.
When a man is drowning in the sea, it is only the log floating near him, however rough and guarled, that will save
him. Does it matter that it is not well shaped, smooth and polished? In the carpenter's shed there may be any
number of beautiful, well wrought pieces of wood, but they are in the workshop, while he is struggling for life in
the sea. This rough, unshapley log alone can save him. He must catch hold of it. In the same way, though the duty
that falls to me may appear unimportant, it alone serves my purpose. It becomes me to be absorbed in it. In it I
find my growth and development. If I wander in search of other service, I shall miss both the old service and the
new. Man thus loses the inclination to serve. Therefore he should remain absorbed in the duty which is svadharma.
20. When we are absorbed in svadharma, rajas loses its glamour, for then our mind is one-pointed. Since it does not
swerve from svadharma, the power of rajas, of distraction, slackens. When the river runs deep and still, however
much its water rises, it is contained within the banks. So, too, the river of svadharma can hold all man's strength
and power and energy. No matter how much energy we put into svadharma, it can never be too much. If we spend all
our energy in svadharma that will be the end of the play of rajas; our unsteadiness wil be stamped out. This is the
way of conquering rajas.
Sattva and how to deal with it
21. What now remains is sattva. We should approach this matter with special care. How to distinguish the Self
from sattva? This is matter for very subtle analysis. We should not altogether destroy sattva. While rajas and
tamas must be utterly destroyed, the case of sattva is somewhat different. When a big crowd is to be dispersed,
the police are ordered to shoot below the knees. The idea is that people are not to be killed, but wounded. In the
same way, sattva should be wounded, not killed.
When rajas and tamas have disappeared, what remains is pure sattva. So long as we have a body we have to take
our stand on something. Then how long can we stand aloof from the sattva which remains after the disappearance
of rajas and tamas? When we begin to identify ourselves with sattva, it drags down the Self from its nature of

pure being. If the light of the lanterns is to spread in all its brightness, the carbon deposit inside the glass has to
be wiped off; if there is dust outside, that too should be washed.
In the same way, the smoke of tamas surrounding the light of the Self should be wiped off. And then the dust of
rajas should also be removed. At last the transparent glass of sattva wil remain. Remove sattva - does it mean
braking the glass? No, for the lantern would become useless if the glass is broken. The glass is needed to spread
the light.
Therefore, we should not break this clean bright glass; but to save our eyes from the glare, we may insert a piece
of paper in front of it. The purpose of this is only to save the eyes from glare. To achieve victory over sattva
means to remove our identification with it, our attachment to it. We have to make use of sattva, but it should be
done in a disciplined, intelligent manner. We should make sattva free of ahamkara, of egoism.
22. How then are we to overcome the egoism, the pride, of sattva? There is a way for this. And that is to make
sattva firm and steadfast within us. By being constant in it, we shall cease to be proud of it. We should be
constantly doing sattvik action. We should make this a part of our nature. We should be constantly doing sattvik
action. We should make this a part of our nature. We should make sattva not a guest who comes and goes, but a
member of the household. We get proud of things that we do once in a way. We sleep daily, but we do not discuss it
with others.
If a patient has no sleep at all for a fortnight and then slept for while, he tells everybody, "I had some sleep
yesterday." It seems to him quite a event. A better example is our breathing. We breathe all the twenty-four
hours of the day, but we do not make much of it. No one boasts of being a breathing animal. If a piece of straw
thrown into the Ganga at Haridwar floats down 1500 miles and reaches Calcutta, does it feel proud of its
achievements?
It was only natural that it should float down with the current. If, however, one swims ten yards against the
current, one considers oneself a hero. The truth is that, when an action is natural, we do not feel proud of it.
23. When some good action gets done through our hands, we are inclined to take the credit for it and feel proud.
Why? Because it was not done naturally. When a good action gets done through a child's hands, the mother pats it
on the back. Otherwise, the child's back would ordinarily know only the touch of the mother's cane. When in the
thick darkness of the night there are a few fire-flies, look how proudly they show themselves off! They do not
display at their brightness at once. The fire-fly twinkles and stops and twinkles again, as if it were playing hide and
seek with light. But if its light were steady, it would not be so proud.
Because it is constant, one notices nothing special in it. If, in the same way sattva shines constantly in all our
actions, it would become our nature. Not only is the lion not proud of its strength, it is not even conscious of it. So
too, sattvik conduct must be so natural and spontaneous with us that we do not even think of it. It is natural for
the sun to give light. The sun takes no pride in it. If anybody sets out to present it with a testimonial, it would say,
"What is the special thing that I have done? I do no more than give light. My life consists in giving light. If I did
not do that, I would die. What else could I do?"
The state of the sattvik man should become like this. Sattva should pervade every pore of his being. When sattva
become so much our nature, we would cease to be proud of it. This is one way to make sattva harmless, to achieve
victory over it.
24. Another way is to give up even the attachment to sattva. Egoism and attachment are two distinct things. But
the difference between them is rather fine. One can understand it more readily by means of an illustration. Even
when the egoism, the pride in sattva, disappears, the attachment to it persists. Take breathing once more as an
example. Thought we are not proud of our breathing, we still have a great desire to breathe. It is impossible to
hold the breath even for five minutes. Though the nose is not proud of breathing, it goes on taking in air. There is
an amusing story about Socrates.

His nose was flat and people used to laugh at it. But the witty philosopher said, "Mine is the most beautiful of
noses. These nostrils are wide and take in a lot of air and therefore they are the best." It means that, though the
nose is not proud of breathing, it desires to breathe.
In the same way we develop an attachment to sattva-guna. Take, for example, kindness to all creatures. Though
this is a useful quality, we should be able to keep away even from this attachment; we should have kindness, but not
attachment to kindness. It is through this sattva-guna that saints show the way clearly to mankind. Because of
their compassion, their bodies become the common possession of all. As flies cover the lump of jaggery, all the
world wraps the saint in affection.
There is so much love in the heart of the saint that the whole world begins to love him. The saint gives up
attachment to his body, and therefore, the whole world becomes attached to it and cares for it. But even from this
attachment the saint must free himself. The world's love, this great fruit even from this he should keep the Self
separate. He should never feel that he is special or unique. In this way, sattva-guna should be digested and
disposed of in the body.
25. Conquer egoism first, and then attachment. Egoism is conquered by constancy in sattva, attachment is
conquered by giving up desire for results, and dedicating to the Lord even the fruit attained through sattva-guna.
When sattva becomes steady in our lives, the fruit will comes before us, sometimes as success, sometimes as fame.
But even this fruit we should regard as something trivial. Not even one of its fruits does the mango tree eat.
However good, however sweet, however juicy the mango, not eating it is sweeter than enjoyment.
26. Dharmaraja in the end cast away the joys of svarga, heaven which he had earned by a lifetime's practice of
virtue. With this he crowned his life of sacrifice. He had the right to taste the sweetness of the fruit; but if he
had tasted it, it would have come to an end. Kshine punye martyalokam vishanti - "When the merits earned are
exhausted, they re-enter the world of morality."
He is caught in this wheel again. How great was the sacrifice of Dharmaraja! It stands for ever before my eyes.
Thus by constant practice of sattva we should achieve victory over its egoism. Standing aloof, and dedicating all
fruits to the Lord, we should free ourselves from attachment to sattva. Only then can we say that we have
achieved victory over sattva-guna.

The Final stage - Self-realization and refuge in bhakti
27. Now to the last matter. Though we become full of sattva, though we over egoism, though we have given up all
attachment to fruit, so long as the body lasts we shall be subject now and again to the assaults of the rajas and
tamas. We might for a while think that we have overcome these gunas, but they come back again and again with all
their power. Therefore, we should be ever vigilant. As the waters of the sea rush in and make inroads into the
land, the floods of rajas and tamas enter our minds and eat into them. There should not, therefore, be the
smallest chink through which they can enter. We should keep constant watch. No matter what care and skill we
exercise, there is danger, so long as we have not attained self-realization, the vision of the Self. Therefore, we
should endeavor, no matter by what means, to attain Self-realization.
28. Self realization will not come from mere vigilance. How then it will come? Will it come through exercise? No.
There is only one way, and that way is to be devoted to the Lord, to yearn for Him with all one's heart. We may
overcome rajas and tamas, we may become steadfast in sattva and give up attachment to its fruit, but this is not
enough. The task is not complete till Self-realization is attained. In the end, therefore, the grace of the Lord is
essential. And through real devotion of the heart, we should qualify for the grace of the Lord. I know no other
means for this. At the end of this Chapter, Arjuna puts the same question, and the Lord answers, "With mind
absolutely one-pointed and without desiring the fruit, be devoted to Me and serve Me, He who serves Me thus
crosses maya, illusion and reaches the other shore. It is not easy by any other means to cross this dense maya."
This is bhakti's easy method. And this is the only way.

THE YOGA OF COMPLETENESS - SEEING THE LORD EVERYWHERE Bhakti is not different from the way
of effort
1. In one sense we have reached the other shore of the Gita to-day. In the Fifteenth Chapter all the idea of the
Gita find their fulfillment. The Sixteenth and the Seventeenth Chapter are in the nature of supplements, and the
Eighteenth Chapter serves as the conclusion. Hence, the Lord at the end of this Chapter calls it shaastra, science.
He says, "iti guhyatamam shaastram idamuktam mayaa anagha." "Thus, O flawless one, have I taught you this
science, the greatest of secrets."
And he says this not because it is the concluding Chapter, but because in it the science and the philosophy of life
that have been taught till now find completion. In this Chapter, paramaartha, the supreme truth, is revealed. The
whole essence of the Vedas is here. The function of the Vedas is to awaken in man the awareness of Paramaartha.
Because this is done in this Chapter, it has come to be honored as "Vedasaara," the essence of the Veda.
We saw in the Thirteenth Chapter the need for separating the Self from the body. In the Fourteenth we analyzed
the efforts necessary for this - through self-control we should give up rajas and tamas; we should develop sattva
and at the same time overcome attachment to it, renounce the fruit of it. In the end, it is said that, in order to
achieve complete success, Self-realization in essential; but without bhakti Self-realization is unattainable
2. The way of bhakti, however, is not different from the way of effort. To show this, at the very beginning of the
Fifteenth Chapter, the world is compared to a mighty tree. This tree has huge branches nourished by the three
gunas. It is said right at the beginning that this tree is to be cut down with the axe of desirelessness and
detachment. It is clear that the discipline described in the previous Chapter is gone over again in the beginning of
this.
By eliminating rajas and tamas, and nourishing sattva, we should develop ourselves. One is destructive work, the
other constructive. Both together form a single path. Removing weeds and sowing seeds are two parts of the same
job.
3. Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhishana are three brothers in the Ramayana, Kumbhakarna is tamas, Ravana is rajas,
Vibhishana is sattva. The Ramayana of these three is built into our body. And in this Ramaayana too, Ravana and
Kumbhakarna are destined to destruction. What remains in the Vibhishana-principle.
And if it takes refuge in the feet of the Lord, it can give you strength and lead you to the goal. And therefore, we
should make it our own. This we have understood in the Fourteenth Chapter. But it is repeated in the beginning of
the Fifteenth Chapter. By the axe of non-attachment, cut off the world of sattva, rajas and tamas. Control rajas
and tamas. Develop sattva and become pure. Conquer even the attachment to sattva and remain free. The Gita is
here placing before us the ideal of the lotus flowers.
4. In India the most noble things of life are compared to the lotus. The lotus is the symbol of our culture. The
lotus, though pure and holy, is unattached. Purity and non-attachment are its two-fold power. We compare every
part of the Lord's body with the lotus. We speak of His lotus-eyes, lotus-feet, lotus-hand, lotus-face, lotus-navel,
lotus-heart and lotus-head and by this comparison we impress on our hearts the truth that everywhere beauty,
holiness and non - attachment exist.
5. This Chapter is intended to complete the discipline mentioned in the previous Chapter. When in our efforts
bhakti and awareness of the Self are combined, they become complete. Bhakti is only a part of the way of effort.
Both Self-realization and bhakti are two halves of the same process. The rishi says in the Vedas:
"yo jaagaara tam richah kaamayante
yo jaagaara tamu saamaani yanti."
"The Vedas love him who is awake; they come of themselves to see him." In other words to him who is awake comes
Vedanaraayana, the Lord in the form of the Vedas, jnana comes to him, bhakti comes to him. Jnana and bhakti are
not different from the way of effort. It is shown in this Chapter that these two principles make effort sweet.
Therefore, let us listen with one-pointed mind to this chapter of bhakti and jnana.

Through bhakti effort becomes easy
6. I cannot cut up life into bits. I cannot separate karma, jnana and bhakti; nor are they separate. For example,
look at the cooking in this jail. A few of us do the work of preparing food for the six or seven hundred people here.
If some of these cooks do no know their job, they would spoil the food. The chapatis would be underdone or burnt
black. But let us take it that they have good knowledge of the art of cooking.
Even so, if there is no love, no bhakti, in their hearts, if they do not feel, "These chapatis are meant for my
brothers, i.e. for Naraayana, they must be well cooked, this is the service of the Lord," if they do not feel this,
they are unfit for the task in spite of all their knowledge of cooking. Cooking requires not only knowledge, but love
too. Unless there is the rasa of bhakti in the heart, there can be no rasa, in the food. That is why a mother's
cooking is particularly tasty. For who else would do this with so much love and care? And tapasya, self sacrificing
austerity, is also necessary for it.
How can this work be done without enduring heat and accepting hardship? From this we conclude that, for success
in any action, love, knowledge and labor, all three are necessary. All the activities of life stand on these three. If
one of the legs of a tripod is broken, it cannot stand; all three legs are needed. The very name conveys the
structure. Such too is the condition of life. Jnana, bhakti, karma, knowledge, love and constant effort, are the
three legs on which life stands. On these three pillars we should construct our Dvaraka, the city of nine gates.
These legs together make up one thing. The image of the tripod fits exactly. Even if you logically distinguish
between bhakti, jnana and karma, you cannot divide them in experience. The three together make up one great
entity.
7. But it does not follow that there is no special quality in bhakti. When the principle of bhakti enters into any
action, it is only then that it appears easy, "To appear easy" does not mean that there will be no difficulty. It only
means that the difficulty will seem not a difficulty, but, on the contrary, a pleasure. Thorns appear as flowers.
What is meant by saying that the way of bhakti is easy? It means that, as a result of the attitude of bhakti the
burden of action is not felt.
The hardship of action disappears. No matter how much work we do, we feel as if we have done no work. Jesus
Christ, says "Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance; for they disfigure their
faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily, I say unto you they have their reward. But thou, when thou
fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face: that thou appear not unto men to fast." The idea is that, we should
be filled with bhakti, so absorbed in it, that we do not feel the hardship.
Do we not say that a patriot walked smiling to the gallow? Sudhanva smiled in the cauldron of boiling oil, while his
lips uttered the names of Krishna, Vishnu, Hari, Govinda. It only means that, because of the power of bhakti, one
does not feel even the most terrible pain. It is not difficult to push a boat floating in the water; but how hard to
drag the same boat on land, on rocks? If there is water under the boat, we can cross over to the other shore
as without effort. In the same way, if our life's boat floats on the waters of bhakti, we can sail gaily in it.
But if life is dry and the way dusty, stony, full of pitfalls, it would be indeed hard to drag the boat along. The
principle of bhakti, like water, makes easy the voyage of our life.
Bhakti makes the path easy, but without Self-knowledge there is no hope of transcending the three gunas. Then,
what is the means to Self-knowledge? It is to make sattva one's own by constancy in it and to try through bhakti
to overcome the egoism of sattva and attachment to it.
If we adopt this means and strive constantly, unremittingly, then the vision of the Self will one day come to us. Till
then we cannot come to the end of our efforts. This is a matter concerning the highest goal of our life. Attaining
the vision of the Self is not mere play. We cannot expect to find it by the wayside. We should maintain a constant
stream of effort. The condition of spiritual life is the resolve, "I shall never give the slightest room to despair. I
shall never - not even for a moment sit still in despondency." There is no other means of spiritual progress.
The seeker sometimes asks in weariness:
"For your sake I have practiced tapas and self-control. Tell me what more I should do, and how

much longer I should strive." But this question is beside the point. We should practice tapas and self-control until
they become our very nature. To ask, "How long, till when, am I to perform sadhana?" Such language is improper in
bhakti. Bhakti never permits diffidence and despair to arise. There would be no sinking of the heart in it. Noble
ideas which can bring progressive joy and enthusiasm to bhakti are revealed in this Chapter.
The triad of seva: master, servant, means of service
8. The universe presents countless objects to our eyes. We can divide them into three classes. As the bhakta
wakes up in the morning, only three objects appear before him. First his mind goes to the Lord. Then he makes
preparations for His worship. "I am the servant, the devotee. He is my Lord, the Master whom I serve" - these
two are ever present.
Now what remains is the rest of creation, which is the means for the worship. The whole of creation is intended to
provide the flowers, the fragrance, the incense and the lights. There are only three things,
the servant devotee, the Lord to be served, and the creation which is the means for this service. It is this lesson
that is taught in this Chapter. But when one worships some image, all the objects of creation do not seem to him
means of worship. He goes and fetches a few flowers from the garden, gets hold of a couple of incense sticks and
prepares some food-offerings. He wishes to choose a few objects.
But there is no need for such selection according to the comprehensive teaching of the Fifteenth Chapter. All the
means of tapas, all the means of karma, are the means of service to the Lord. Some of them we would call flowers,
some incense and some
food-offerings. In this way, we should make all actions means of worshipping the Lord. It is thus we should look at
it. There are only these three things in the world. To the way of non-attached effort which the Gita tries to
impress upon our hearts, it gives a form full of bhakti.Thus, it takes away from action the character of action and
renders it easy.
9. When in an ashrama some one has to do a lot of work, it never occurs to him to complain, "Why should I alone do
so much work?" There is a beauty in this. If the worshipper gets four hours instead of the usual two for his
worship, would he complain, "Good Lord, I had to worship for four hours today!"? On the contrary, he would
rejoice all the more. One has experience in an ashrama. We should have this experience everywhere in life.
Life should be consecrated to service. He is purushottama, the Supreme Person, who receives our service; and I,
ever absorbed in His service an akshara-purusha, an imperishable person. "Akshara - purusha" means the eternal
servant who knows no weariness and serves from the beginning of creation. He is like Hanuman who is ever standing
before Rama with folded hands. He is an absolute stranger to laziness. Like Hanuman he stands, living for ever,
absorbed in service. Such a lifelong servant is called akshara-purusha, the unchanging, the immortal Person.
The Supreme Self lives; and I, His servant, I too live for ever. If the Master exists, then I too exist. Let us see
who gets tired first, He by accepting or I by offering service. If He has taken ten avatars, I too have had ten
avatars. When He is Rama, I am Hanuman. When He is Krishna, I am Uddhava. Every time He is born, I am born too.
Let this happy rivalry go on! The soul serves the Lord in this way, yuga after yuga, aeon after aeon, and is never
destroyed. This is the
akshara-purusha. He, the Supreme Person, is the Master; I am His servant, His slave. This bhavana, this attitude,
should be kept steady and unchanging in the heart. This creation changes every moment and shines in manifold
forms; we should make it the means of worship, the instrument of service. Every act we perform is worship of the
Lord.
10. He that is served, the Supreme Self, is purushottama; he that serves the Soul is the imperishable person; but
the means of service creation is kshara, perishable. There is deep significance in its being perishable. This is not a
fault in creation, it is its glory. Because of this, creation is ever new. Yesterday's flowers will not do for today;
they are fit only to be cast away. Creation is perishable; it is good thing that it is so.
This is glory of service. Every day fresh flowers are available for worship. In the same way, I wil take on new
bodies and render service to the Lord. Everyday I shall give new forms to the medium of worship. It is because it
is transient that it is beautiful.

11. Today's moon is not the same as yesterday's. Every day it acquires a new grace. What joy it is to behold the
waxing moon two days old! How it shines upon the forehead of Lord Shiva! The beauty of the eighth day moon is
quite different. Then only a few choice pearls are seen in the sky.
During Full Moon, because the brightness, not a star is to be seen. Then we see in the moon the face of the Lord.
And majestic is the beauty of the New Moon night. How serene and undisturbed its calm! The sovereign brightness
of the moon withdrawn, countless stars, small and large, blossom out in perfect freedom. The freedom of
amaavasyaa, the New Moon night, has full play. The moon with its proud display of brightness is not there. It has
become one with the sun which gives it light. It has joined the Lord. Then it seems to show that the soul can
surrender itself without being the cause of any sorrow to the world. The moon's form is transient; mutable, but it
gives joy through all its many forms.
12. It is its mutability that makes creation immortal. The form of creation flows like a gurgling stream. If the
Ganga does not keep flowing, it would become a stagnant pool. The water flows in an unbroken stream. But it is for
ever changing. One drop replaces another. And so the water lives. One finds joy in an object because it is new. In
summer, we worship the Lord with flowers. In the rainy season, we offer the tender green dub grass. In autumn, it
is the beautiful lotus.
With the flowers and the fruits that are in season, the Lord is worshipped. That is why worship is bright and ever
fresh, one never gets tired of it. If we write out the letter 'A' for a child and tell him to write again and again
over it, thickening the lines, it simply bores him. He cannot understand why the lines should be made thick. He
blunts the point of the pencil and does it as quickly as possible. But later he learns new letters and new
combinations of letters. He begins to read many kinds of books. He experiences the masterpieces of literature.
Then he has boundless joy. It is the same with worship. Because the instruments are ever new, the enthusiasm for
worship grows. The habit of service develops. Because of the transitoriness of creation we have fresh flowers
every day. The cremation ground is near the village; that is why children are being born. Creation is renewed every
day. If we abolish the cremation ground out there, it would come in and occupy the house. You would get tired of
seeing the same people day after day. It is hot in summer; the earth is parched.
But do not be afraid. All this will change. This burning heat is necessary for us to enjoy the pleasures of the rainy
season. If the earth were not hot and dry, the first shower would make it slushy. And neither grass nor grain would
grow on it. Once I was wandering about on a hot summer day. My head was hot. I was filled with joy. A friend said
to me. "You will get sunstroke." I said, "The earth below is burning. Let this clay doll too burn a little."
What joy to have a cold shower on a burning head! But he who is not scorched in the summer sun will bury his head
in his books even when it rains. He will remain in his room, in his grave. He would not dance with joy under this vast
sacred shower out in the open. But our maharshi Manu was a great enjoyer and lover of Nature. He says in his
Smriti, "When it rains, declare a holiday." When it is raining out, who would sit and chant Vedic verses again and
again? When it rains, we should sing and dance. We should become one with Nature.
Then, earth and heaven meet and mingle. The beautiful sight fills us with joy. It is as if creation itself is teaching
us. The truth is that the mutability and transience of creation means freshness in the medium of worship. Thus we
have creation forever presenting us with an ever-new progeny of means; the immortal servant, standing ever ready
to serve with girt loins; and the Supreme Self to be served. Now let the game go on. The Lord Supreme gives me
means which are endlessly new and wonderful and He takes from me service which springs from love. Giving me all
sorts of things, He lets me play. He uses me in all sorts of ways. If only we can develop this attitude in life, what
happiness would be ours!
Ego-less service in bhakti
13. The Gita wants every action of ours to be filled with bhakti. It is good that we worship God for half an hour
now and then. Morning and evening, when the beautiful light of the sun spreads out its colors, it is an excellent idea
to steady one's mind to forget the world for a while and meditate on the Infinite. We should not give up such good
habits. But the Gita is not satisfied with them.

All our actions from morning till night should become worship of the Lord. Bathing, eating or sweeping, we should
think of the Lord. While sweeping, we should have the bhavana, the attitude, that we are cleaning for courtyard of
the Lord, the master of our life. All our actions should thus become acts of worship. Once this attitude becomes
yours, observe what a vast difference it makes to your life. How carefully we choose flowers for worship, how
gently we carry them, so that they may not get bruised or crumpled or faded! For fear that it might lose its
freshness, we do not take the flower near our nose.
This same attitude, this bhavana, should enter into all our daily actions. In this very village of mine, my Naraayana,
my Lord, plays about in the form of my neighbour. Therefore, I shall keep this village clean and tidy. The Gita
wishes to give us this attitude. Its great desire is to make all our actions into worship of the Lord. To a king of
Scriptures like the Gita, a half-hour puja yields no satisfaction. Its keen desire is that the whole of life should be
filled with the Lord and be a form a worship.
14. The Gita teaches the purushottam - yoga and brings to perfection the life of karma. He is Purushottam, the
Lord, receiving service. I am His servant, and all this creation the instrument for His service. If once we realize
this relationship, what more do we need? Tukaram says,
"Once the vision is attained, I shall serve. I shall ask for nothing more, my Lord."
Then continuous service will proceed. Then there is no such thing as "I". "I" and "mine" are swept away, and then
whatever remains is for the sake of the Lord. Life is lived entirely for the good of others. There is nothing else.
This is what the Gita teaches again and again; I shall remove from myself all sense of "I" and surrender my life to
the Lord and fill it with bhakti. The Lord to serve, I the servant, and creation, the means. Where is the talk of
possession now? Life has no care any more.
The mark of jnana - Seeing the Self in all three
15. Till now we have seen that we should thus fill karma with bhakti, but there should be in it jnana too, else the
Gita would not be satisfied. This does not mean that these three are different things. We distinguish them only in
speech. Karma means bhakti. There is no need to bring bhakti from elsewhere and put it into karma. It is the same
with jnana.
How shall we find jnana? The Gita says, "By seeing purusha, the Self, everywhere" You are the servant, the Self
eternally serving. He is the Purushottama, the Self eternally served, and this creation that
bears endless new forms, that gives to us all kinds of means of service, that keeps ever-flowing this too is purusha,
the Self.
16. What is meant by this attitude? Everywhere we should assume the attitude of pure, flawless service. If your
sandals squeak, give them some oil. In them, too is something of the Lord; so attend to them with care. Apply oil
also to the charkha, an instrument of service. Listen, it calls for attention. It says. "Neti, neti, I won't spin." This
charkha, this instrument of service, is also Purusha. Take good care of its belt, its sacred thread. Regard all
creation as filled with chaitanya, as alive and aware. Don't set it down as inert. The charkha that sings out "Om," is it inert? It is an image of the Supreme. On the New Moon day of shravan, we shed our pride and offer worship
to the ox. This is a great matter.
Remembering this observance every day, let us look after our oxen
and get appropriate work from them. The bhakti that rises in our heart should not stop with that day. The ox too is
an image of the Lord. The plough, and all these other implements of agriculture, keep them in good order. All the
tools of service are holy. How broad is this vision! Worship does not mean offering flowers and consecrated rice
and sprinkling kumkum (vermilion).
To keep vessels clean and polished like crystal, that is worship of the vessels. To clean the lamp is to worship it. To
whet the scythe and make it ready for reaping is worship. To lubricate the rusty hinge of the door, this is worship
too. We should use all things with this attitude. We should
keep all the materials of service clean and in good condition. The truth is that I am akshara-purusha, the

imperishable Self. He is Purushottam, the Self Supreme, and this Creation, the means of service, this too, is
purusha, the Supreme Being.
Once we have vision of the play of chaitanya, of consciousness, everywhere, we can say that jnana too has entered
our action.
17. First we put bhakti into karma, devotion into action. Now, we add jnana to it, we make the divine elixir which will
transform life. The Gita has in the end brought us to the way of service filled with advaita, the sense of oneness,
and leaves us there. Wherever we look in a creation we see three purushas. Purushottama, the one Supreme Person
has assumed these three forms.
In reality, the three together constitute one Person. There is nothing but oneness. Here the Gita has led us to the
highest peak. Karma, bhakti, jnana have all become one. Man, God and Creation have all become one. Between karma,
bhakti and jnana there is now no conflict.
18. In his Amritanubhava, Jnanadev gives an example very popular in Maharashtra:
"Out of rock we chisel the Lord, His temple and His followers.
Why should not the acts of bhakti be like this too?"
Out of the rock we make the temple, and the throne and the image of God. Out of the same rock, we make the
devotee standing in the front, and carve too the fruit he offers.
One big rock assumes all these different forms. Why should not the same thing happen with bhakti too? Even in
the relationship of Master and servant, why should there not be oneness? This outward creation, these materials
of worship, distinct though they be, why should they not become of the nature of the Self? The three Purushas
are after all one. To combine the streams of jnana, karma and bhakti into a mighty river of life - this is the perfect
purushottama-yoga. The Master, the servant, and the instruments of service - they are all one. Now let us play the
game of devotion and love.
19. He, on whose heart is impressed this purushottama-yoga, he alone can perform true bhakti, "sa sarvavid
bhajati maam sarvabhav ena bhaarata." "Knowing all, he worships me, O Bharata, with all his being."
Such a man, though he is a jnani, remains a pure bhakta. Where there is knowledge; there is love too. Knowing the
Lord and loving Him are not two different things.
If we have the knowledge that the karela (the bitter gourd) is bitter, then we have no love for it. There may be
one or two exceptions; but whenever bitterness is experienced, we feel disgust. The moment we hear of sugarcandy, our tongue waters, love for it wells up. But with the Lord, to know Him and to love Him are the same. But can
one compare the sweetness of the Lord's form with so common a thing as sugar-candy? The moment we have the
knowledge of the sweet Lord, the same instant love
for Him springs in our heart.
The birth of knowledge and the birth of love are not two different events. There is no point in the discussion
whether there is room for bhakti in advait, Jnanadev says, "Only know Vitthal. This is bhakti this is jnana."
Bhakti and jnana are two names of the one thing.
20. The work that gets done when the supreme bhakti pervades life is not different from bhakti and jnana. Karma,
bhakti and jnana together make a single beautiful form. And from it springs naturally, wonderful service full of love
and full of knowledge. One loves one's mother; but this love should express itself in action. Love is constantly
striving, and expressing itself in the form of service. The outer form of love is service.
Love adorns itself with innumerable acts of service and comes out dancing. Where there is love, knowledge comes
and joins
it. When I am to serve a person, I should know what service would please him. Or else, it would be disservice or

wrong service. Love must have knowledge of that which it would serve. To spread through action the power of love,
knowledge is needed. But at the root of this knowledge, there must be love.
Without it, knowledge would be useless. An act performed through love is very different from an ordinary act. As
the son comes home tired from the field, the mother looks at him with natural love and says. "You are tired, my
child." Look, how much power there is in this small action! Weave all the actions of your life with the warp and woof
of bhakti and jnana. This is what is called purushottama - yoga.
The essence of all the Vedas in the palm of my hand
21. This is the essence of all the Vedas. The Vedas are infinite. But the distilled essence of the infinite Vedas in
this purushottama-yoga. Where are these Vedas? Their ways are strange. Where is their essence? At the very
beginning of this Chapter it is said, "He whose leaves the vedas are." My brother, the Vedas fill every leaf of the
tree. The vedas are not hidden in the Samhitas (collections of mantras) or in your books and treatises. They
pervade the whole universe. Shakespeare speaks of
"... Tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones ..."
The idea is that the Vedas are neither in Sanskrit not in the Samhitas, but in all Creation. If you serve, they will
appear before you.
22. We say, "prabhaate karadarshanam" - "looking at one's palm early in the morning." All the Vedas are in that
palm and they say, "Serve." Consider whether your hands worked yesterday, whether they are fit to work again
today and whether they carry the marks of service. When the hands are worn out with service, then the destiny
that Brahma ordained for you becomes clear. This is the meaning of "looking at one's palm in the morning."
23. People ask, "Where are the Vedas?" My brother, they are in your hands. I am the Vedas living and awake. All
the generations that have gone before have found their fulfillment in me. I am the fruit of this long line. From the
seed of the Vedas came this fruit. In my fruit are gathered the seeds of endless Vedas. The Vedas within me have
increased five-fold and fifty-fold.
24. The truth is, the essence of the Vedas, is in our hands. We have to build our lives on the foundations of
service, love and knowledge. That is what is meant by saying that the Vedas, are in our hands - The meaning that I
see in the Vedas, not something, somewhere, outside. The saints, who are the embodiment of the service, declare,
"It is we who know the meaning of the Vedas." The Lord says, "Me alone all the Vedas know. I am the light of the
Vedas, their essence, the Purushottama." If we can make this essence of the Vedas, the Purushottama-yoga, our
own, if we can make it part of our lives, what joy it would be!
The Gita shows us how the Vedas themselves are revealed in the actions of such man. In this Chapter is present
the whole essence of the Gita. The whole of its teaching is revealed here. All of us should labor day and night to
inform our lives with it. What else?
A SUPPLEMENT - THE CONFLICT BETWEEN DIVINE AND DEMONIC TENDENCIES
The dawn of Purushottama-yoga : attainment of divine qualities
1. In the first five Chapters of the Gita, we saw the whole scheme of life and the means of achieving life's
purposes. Then, from the Sixth to the Eleventh Chapter we had a vision of bhakti. In the Twelfth Chapter we
compared the saguna and nirguna forms and saw the qualities of the bhakta.
Throughout this Chapter we analyzed thoroughly the two principles of karma and bhakti. Then there remained the
third principle of jnana and this we studied in the Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth Chapters. We learnt how
to separate the Self from the body, how to master the three gunas and in the end see God everywhere. The
Fifteenth Chapter gave us the complete science of life, which reaches perfection in purushottama-yoga. After
that, nothing remains.

2. I cannot bear to see karma, jnana and bhakti separated. To some seekers established in karma, this is the only
thing that appears worth-while. Others regard bhakti as an independent method and place all their emphasis on it.
Still others choose jnana. Life does not mean mere karma or mere bhakti or mere jnana. I do not like this "mere"
philosophy. And I do not accept the opposite view that would combine karma, bhakti and jnana. Nor do I like the
utilitarian philosophy of a little of bhakti, a little of jnana and a little of karma.
The theory of successive stages - first karma, then bhakti, then jnana - this too I do not accept. I wish to
experience that which is karma is bhakti and jnana too. The sweetness, the shape and the weight of a cake are not
things apart. When we put it into our mouth, we eat up its form, absorb its weight and taste its sweetness. The
three are mingled together. In every particle of the sweet cake is found its form, its weight and its sweetness.
It is not as if the shape alone is found in one particle, the mere weight in another, and the sweetness by itself in a
third. In the same way, the spirit should pervade every action of our life - every action should be full of service,
full of love and full of knowledge. Every part of life should be filled to overflowing with karma, bhakti and jnana.
This is called purushottama - yoga.
It is easy to say that the whole of life should be given over to the spirit, but if we begin to think of what these
words mean, we shall see that, in order to render absolutely flawless service, we have to act in the confident belief
that our hearts are moved by pure jnana and bhakti. Therefore, this ultimate state in which karma, bhakti and
jnana are inseparably one is called purushottama-yoga. Here we reach the goal of life.
3. Now, what is said in the Sixteenth Chapter? Just as, before the sun rises, its light begins to spread, so too,
before the purushottama-yoga full of karma, bhakti and jnana rises in our lives, the dawn of good qualities shines
forth. The Sixteenth Chapter describes the light which is to shine in the perfect life. It also describes the
darkness with which it has to battle before it emerges.
As proof of the existence of something unseen, we wish to have some visible symbol. How are we to know that
service, love and knowledge have entered our life? When we have worked hard in the fields, we harvest the grain,
measure it and bring it home. This Chapter indicates how in the same way we can assess our sadhana - what
experiences we went through, what good qualities we acquired, what good habits we formed, how far in reality our
life was made up of service.
The aim of this chapter is to enable us to measure how far the art of life has developed and progressed. To this
growing art of life, which waxes like the moon, the Gita gives the name of "daivi sampat," divine attainments. The
opposite tendencies it calls "asuri sampat," demonic attainments. The Sixteenth Chapter describes the conflict
between the divine and the demonic qualities.
The armies of violence and non-violence
4. Just as in the First Chapter the Kaurava army stood fact to face with the Pandava army, so here, the divine
army of good qualities is brought fact to face with the demonic army of bad qualities. From very early times is the
tradition of representing through symbols the struggle that rages between good and bad in the heart of man.
In the Vedas, Indra against Vritra; in the Puranas, devas against danavas; in the epic, Rama against Ravana; in the
scriptures of Parsis, Ahuramazda against Ahriman; among the Jews, Jehovah against Satan; in Islam, Allah against
Iblis - such conflicts are found in all religious traditions. While in poetry concrete things are described
metaphorically through subtle objects, in religious works subtle inward movements are described by giving them
clear concrete forms.
In one, the gross is described through the subtle, and in the other, the subtle in terms of the gross. This is not to
say that the battle described at the beginning of the Gita is merely imaginary; it may have been a historical event.
But the poet here uses it to achieve his chosen purpose. Through the image of a battle he explains what a man
should do when his mind is deluded by conflict of duties. The Sixteenth Chapter describes the conflict between
good and evil. The Gita uses the allegory of war.

5. Kurukshetra is both outside us and within us. When we observe it carefully, it is the battle raging within that we
see assuming shape in the world without. He who seems to be my enemy is only the passion in my heart taking on a
shape and standing out there. Just as my image, handsome or ugly, appears in the mirror, it is the bad and good
thoughts of our mind that appear without as our enemies and friends.
As we see in dreams what we have seen while awake, so we see in the world without what is in our hearts. Between
the battle within and the battle without, there is little difference. To speak the truth, the real battle is only
within ourselves.
6. Within us there are good qualities on one side and bad ones on the other. And both armies are well arranged. An
army needs a commander. The good qualities have their own commander named "abhaya," fearlessness. Fearlessness
has been given the first place in this Chapter. This is not mere accident, but deliberate.
Without truth good qualities have no value; but then, for truth, fearlessness is essential. In an atmosphere
charged with fear, good qualities cannot grow; in fact they become themselves bad qualities, and good efforts and
tendencies get weakened. Fearlessness is the commander of all good qualities; but the army has to be watched
front and rear, on both sides. The direct attack will, of course, be in front, but one may also be stealthily set upon
from behind.
While, in front, Fearlessness stands alert, humility guards the rear. This is an excellent arrangement. Here twentysix qualities are enumerated. If we have twenty-five of these qualities, but have ahamkara, egoism or pride in
these, there is every chance of stealthy attack from behind in which we shall lose all that we have now. That is why
the virtue called Humility is stationed in the rear.
In the absence of humility, there is no knowing when victory will turn into defeat. Thus by placing Fearlessness in
front Humility in the rear we can develop all the good qualities. It would not be wrong to say that twenty-four good
qualities placed between these two great virtues are for the most part synonyms of ahimsa. Compassion,
tenderness, forgiveness, serenity, patience, non-violence, loyalty, all these are only other names of ahimsa. In the
twin qualities of ahimsa and satya, non-violence and truth, all good qualities are included; they are the essence of
them all.
But the case of fearlessness and humility is different. Fearlessness makes advance possible and humility ensures
safety. With our stock of satya and ahimsa, we should advance fearlessly. Life is vast. We should travel in it
without let or hindrance. If, lest we should make a false step, we remain ever humble, no danger will come to us.
Now we can proceed joyously, applying truth and non-violence everywhere. The truth is the satya and ahimsa grow
only through fearlessness and humility.
7. While, on one side, the army of good qualities is thus arrayed on the other, the army of bad qualities also stands
ready. There is no need to say very much about bad qualities like vanity and ignorance. Our whole life is founded on
vanity. And of ignorance it can be said that it has become a beautiful excuse. Which we trot out on every occasion,
almost as if ignorance were anything but a crime.
But the Lord says, "Ignorance is a sin." Socrates says just the opposite of this. In the course of his trail he says,
"What you think is a sin is only ignorance, and how are you going to punish ignorance?" But the Lord says,
"Ignorance too is sin." According to legal theory ignorance of law cannot establish innocence. Ignorance of God's
law is also a great crime. Both the Lord and Socrates mean the same thing. The Lord tells us how to regard our own
ignorance, and Socrates tells us how to regard the sins of others.
Other people's sins we should forgive. But it is a sin to excuse even ignorance in oneself. We should not allow the
least vestige of ignorance to remain in ourselves.
The growth of ahimsa : four stages
8. The divine qualities on one side, the demonic on the other - thus the two armies stand arrayed against each
other. Of these, we should leave the demonic qualities and join the divine qualities. The divine qualities of satya and

ahimsa have been developed from time immemorial. And between then and now, during all this time, too, there has
been great progress.
But, even so, there is plenty of room for further progress. We have by no means reached the end of the process.
As long as we belong to a social organism, there will be endless opportunity for development. Though the individual
development is complete, there still remains the growth of society, the nation and the world. Offering his own
development as manure, the individual should help society and the millions of people in the nation to grow. Though
from the beginning of time ahimsa has been developed by man, the process of evolution is still going on.
9. It is worth studying how ahimsa has developed. We would then understand how the life of religion has developed
step by step and what scope there is for further growth. In the beginning the non-violent man had to consider how
to save himself from the attacks of the violent. At first the kshatriya class was set up for the protection of
society, but it went too far and started devouring society itself.
Then the non-violent brahmins began to consider how society could be saved from these power-mad kshatriyas.
Parashurama, though a devotee of ahimsa himself, resorted to violence. He set out to destroy the kshatriyas. For
removing the violence of kshatriyas, he himself adopted violence. Though this was an effort of ahimsa, the attempt
did not succeed.
Twenty-one times he destroyed the kshatriyas, still they survived, because the method was wrong in its very basis.
He who set our to destroy the kshatriyas became a kshatriya himself and added to their numbers. How then could
the kshatriyas caste be destroyed? He himself had become a kshatriya and the seed of violence survived. If one
cuts down the trunk and branches of a tree but preserves the seed, one will only see the tree sprouting up again
and again.
Parashurama was, no doubt, an excellent fellow, but his attempt was strange. Himself becoming a kshatriya, he
tried to clear the world of kshatriyas. He should have begun with himself. He should have cut off his own head
first. When I point to Parashurama's fault here, it does not mean that I am more intelligent than he. Compared to
him, I am a child; but I stand on his shoulders, and can therefore see much farther without effort. The very basis
of Parashurama's action was wrong.
It is not possible to remove violence when one is himself full of violence. On the contrary, one only adds to the
number of the violent. But this was not realized at the time. The great men of those days, men of non-violence,
acted according to their lights. Parashurama was a great exponent of non-violence, for that age. He did not
practice violence for the sake of violence. He did violence in order to establish non-violence.
10. But that experiment failed. Then came the age of Rama. Then the brahmins began to think about it again. They
had already given up violence; they had resolved never to commit violence themselves. How then to escape the
attacks of rakshasas? They thought, "Here are these kshatriyas who practice violence anyhow; why should not the
rakshasas be destroyed through them? One uses a thorn to remove a thorn. We shall stand aside."
That is why, to protect his yajna, sacrifice, Vishvamitra took Rama and Lakshmana and had the rakshasas
destroyed by them. Now we think, "The ahimsa that cannot protect itself, that cannot stand to its own legs, this
lame ahimsa, how can it sustain itself?" But men like Vashishtha and Vishvamitra saw nothing wrong in finding
protection in the strength of the kshatriyas. But what if there was no kshatriya like Rama?
Then Visvamitra would have said, "I would rather die than commit violence." For the experiment of ending violence
through violence had already been attempted. Now this much had been clearly accepted that they would not give up
their own non-violence. If they could not find a kshatriya, they would prefer to die. To that extent the ground had
been prepared. In the Aranyakanda of the Ramayana, there is an episode.
Walking in the Dandaka forest, Rama asks, "What are these heaps?" The rishis answer, "These heaps are made up
of the bones of Brahmins, of non-violent Brahmins. When the violent rakshasas attacked them, they did not resist.
They lost their lives. It is their bones that are piled up here. "In this non-violence one sees the self-sacrifice of

the Brahmins; but, at the same time, they had a wish that others would protect them. Where there is such
weakness, non-violence cannot teach perfection.
11. In later times, good men went further and tried a third method. They resolved, "We shall never seek the help
of the others to save ourselves. Our ahimsa is enough to protect us. That is the only true defense." But this
experiment was conducted, on the individual plane. They perfected this individual method, but it stopped with the
individual. If violent men attacked society and men went and appealed to those saints and asked, "What shall we do
now?" it is doubtful whether they would have given a definite answer. These saints, who had practiced ahimsa in
their own lives to perfection, would only have said, Brothers, we can do nothing." It is childish impertinence on my
part to find fault with the saints in this way, but I am only describing what I see, sitting on their shoulders. May
they forgive me for this! And they will, for great is their forgiveness. It would not be true to say that they were
never moved to use the method of ahimsa on the social plane.
It may be that the condition of the time did not seem propitious. And so they experimented individually, by
themselves. But it is out of such experiments, conducted separately by individuals, that a science is born. Science
arises from the combined experience of many.
12. After these individual experiments of saints, today we are conducting the fourth experiment. And that is, the
whole of the society is joining together to oppose violence with the methods of ahimsa. Thus there have been four
experiments so far. In each of them there have been and there are imperfections. That is inevitable in the course
of progress. But it must be said that each method was perfect for its time. And ten thousand years later, people
will see even in our non-violent struggle an element of violence.
Many more experiments in pure ahimsa will, of course, take place yet. Not only jnana, karma and bhakti, but all good
qualities are evolving. There is only one perfection, and that is the Supreme. The purushottama-yoga of the
Bhagavad Gita is complete, but in individual and social life these qualities are to develop fully.
Words too keep growing. The rishis are considered to be the seers of mantras, not the makers of them. For it is
not as if the meaning they found in the mantras is the only true meaning. They had one vision of it. To us, coming
after them, a more evolved meaning may appear. That we can see a little more than they is not due to any special
merit in us, for we only build on the foundation they laid. I have been speaking so much on the growth of ahimsa
alone. What is because, if we take the common essence of all these good qualities, we shall find that it is ahimsa.
Moreover we are engaged today in a non-violent struggle. And so we considered the evolution of this principle.
A great experiment in ahimsa : giving up meat-eating
13. Till now we saw one aspect of ahimsa, how a non-violent man defends himself against the attacks of the violent,
how ahimsa has evolved in the struggle between individuals. But there is also a conflict between man and animal.
Man has not yet been able to put an end to conflict between human beings, and he lives by filling his stomach with
the flesh of animals.
Men cannot stop fighting with one another even now, nor can they live without eating helpless lower animals which
also live. Man cannot yet live like a man. Though he has existed for thousands of years, he has not yet learnt how to
live. But, now, even in this matter there is progress. Probably, the aboriginal man must have been Vegetarian, but
later on due to perverse thinking, most of the mankind took to eating meat. But even then those who were more
intelligent, the nobler ones, did not like this.
They laid down a restriction that if they had to eat meat, they would eat only the flesh of animals offered in
sacrifice. The intention behind this was to limit violence. Many people gave up meat altogether; but those who could
not do so were permitted to offer it to the Lord in sacrifice, do a little penance, and then eat it. It was thought
then that, as a result of the condition that one could only eat meat in a yajna, a sacrifice, violence would be
controlled.
But later on, yajna became common and whoever felt like it performed a sacrifice and ate the meat. Then Lord
Buddha went a step further. He said, "If you want to eat meat, eat it. But don't bring the name of God into it." The
aim of both these statements is the same, that violence should be controlled, that somehow people should be drawn

into the path of self-control. Both from the performance of yajnas and from non-performance of them, we learnt
to give up meat. Thus, little by little, we gave up eating meat.
14. In the history of the world it is only in India that this great experiment has been attempted. Millions of people
here have given up meat-eating. If today we do not eat meat, it is no mark of our greatness. Because of the merit
of our ancestors, we have got used to this. Why, we are surprised when we hear or read that the rishis of old ate
meat. We say, "What nonsense! How could rishis eat meat? It's impossible." On the other hand, their greatness is
that, though used to taking meat, they had self-control enough to give it up. We do not have to go through all that
trouble now.
We have, without effort on our part, inherited their virtues. The fact that they ate meat in ancient times, and
that we don't do so now, does not mean that we are better than they. The fruit of their experience has come to us
easily. We should now progress further. We should make an effort to give up even milk altogether. It is degrading
of man to drink the milk of other animals. Ten thousand years hence the men of the future will say of us, "Why did
our ancestors have to take a solemn vow not to drink milk? Ram! Ram! How could they bring themselves to drink
milk? Were they such savages?" We should fearlessly and humbly make experiments and progress steadily. The
true of truth should throw out new branches. There is plenty of room for development. No quality has yet evolved
to its fullness.
The three asurik ambitions : Power, Culture, Wealth
15. We should develop the divine tendencies and keep away from the demonic. The Lord describes the demonic
qualities so that we may keep away from them. There are three important things here. The essence of the demonic
character is contained in "power, culture and wealth." Such people believe that theirs is the only great culture and
their overweening ambition is to thrust it on the whole world.
To the question, "why should our culture be thrust on others?" they answer, "Because it is the best." "How is it the
best?" "Because it is ours." To the asurik man as to the asurik empire, these three things are necessary.
16. The brahmins too believe, "Ours is the best culture of all, Our Vedas contain all wisdom. Vedic culture should
be victorious all over the world." 'Agrataschaturo vedaan prishthatah sasharam dhanuh,' "the four Vedas in front,
the bow and arrow ready at the back."
Thus equipped, fly the flag of your culture everywhere. But where there is the strung bow and arrow at the back,
the poor Vedas in the hands are as good as finished and done away with. The Muslims too think that what is found
written in the Quran is alone true. The Christians think likewise. They feel that no matter how virtuous a nonChristian may be, he can never enter heaven unless he has faith in Jesus. They have provided only one door to the
temple of God, and that is the door of Jesus. People build for themselves houses with many doors and windows, but
for the house of their poor dear Lord provide only one door.
17. Everybody imagines:
"I am the noblest born; my wealth is great.
Where is my equal?"
Who am I? I belong to the line of the Bharadvaja. I can trace without a break my lineage from the great rishi.
People in the West feel the same way. They say. "Noble Norman blood runs through my veins." Don't we in our
country trace a guru-shishya line? It begins with Shiva, the adiguru, the first teacher.
And then, Brahman or somebody else; then Narada and Vyasa; then some other rishi; then in between ten or
fifteen other names; and after them, my guru and then, finally myself. Through this pedigree we try to prove our
own greatness and that of our culture. My dear fellow, if indeed your culture is great, let your conduct reveal it.
Let its splendor pervade your life. But this doesn't happen.
The desire to spread throughout the world the culture that we do not practice in our own life, in our own home this way of thinking is asurik.

18. "My culture is the noblest," we say. It is just like this to think, "I am the only person fit to hold all the wealth
of the world. I want all the world's wealth, and I will make it mine." And why should I make it mine? To divide it
equally among all. In order to do this, I first bury myself in this wealth. Akbar too said in the same way, "Why
don't these Rajputs join my empire? If there is one big empire, peace would be established." Akbar sincerely
believed this. The asuras of our day too think that they should collect all the wealth of the world. What for? To
distribute it again to everybody.
19. And for this I need power. All power should be concentrated in one hand. Thez whole world should come under
my control. "Self-rule" is my rule. To obey me is freedom. In this way culture, power and wealth - these three are
encouraged by the asurik temperament.
20. There was a time when the brahmins ruled society. They made the shastras and the codes of law; kings bowed
before them. The age passed and gave place to the age of the kshatriyas. Their horses roamed free over their
empire, and they went in triumphal progress in all four directions. And this kshatriya culture too went as it came.
The brahmin said, "I am the giver of knowledge, the others are takers. Who but me can be the guru, the teacher?"
The brahmins were proud of their culture.
The kshatriyas set store by power, saying "I killed this man today, I shall kill some other man tomorrow." Then
came the age of the vaishyas. "Hit the back if you like, but not the belly" - this is the whole philosophy of the
vaishya. His heart is in his stomach. "The wealth is mine, and that, too shall become mine," - this is his prayer, this
is his resolve. Do not the English tell us, "If you want swaraj, take it.
But give us the right and facilities to sell our manufactured goods here. Then by all means preserve your culture.
Keep your lion-cloth and sit there with your culture." The wars of today are all waged for the sake for trade. This
age too will go; it has already begun to depart. All these are forms of asurik sampat.
Self-control, the way to shake off desire and anger
21. We should push away from us our asurik tendencies. Briefly, asurik sampat means desire, anger and greed.
These three are forces that set the world dancing. Let us put an end to this dance. We must give it up. Anger and
greed spring from desire. When circumstances favor desire, greed arises; when they obstruct desire, anger arises.
Again and again the Gita tells us to beware of these three. This is what is said at the end of the Sixteenth
Chapter, that desire, anger and greed are the three broad gateways of Hell. They are thronged by crowds coming
in and going out. The roads to Hell are very wide. There is room for many motor cars, you can find many companions
on the way. But the path of truth is narrow.
22. How then are we to escape from desire, anger and greed? By accepting the way of control of the senses. This
is the path laid down in the shastras. The shastras are nothing but the experience of the saints. The shastras are
made up of the experience the saints gained through their efforts. Therefore, hold fast to this principle of selfcontrol. Do not have any doubt or fear that it will fail. Please do not raise such arguments or questions as, "What
will happen to the world if desire and anger disappear?
Should not the world go on? Should there not be at least a little desire, a little anger?" There is already plenty of
desire and anger, my brothers, a great deal more than you need. Then why do you confuse your minds needlessly?
There is a grain of two more of desire, anger and greed than you wish for. Do not worry yourself that the human
race will come to an end when desire dies.
No matter how many children you produce, a day will come when the very name of man will disappear from the
earth. The scientists say so. The earth is slowly getting colder. At one time the earth was excessively hot. Then
there were no living creatures on it. Life had not been born. A time will come hereafter when the earth will become
excessively cold and all life will perish. This may take millions of years. No matter how prolific you are, that final
dissolution is certain.

The avataras of the Lord are for the preservation of dharma, not for preservation of numbers. As long as there is
one man devoted to dharma, one man who is afraid of sin and steadfast in truth, there is no cause for worry. The
Lord will take care of him. Whether thousands of people are alive or dead makes no difference when their dharma
is dead.
23. Remembering all this, live an ordered life in creation, controlling your senses. Do not follow your own whims.
The good of the world does not mean doing the things the world wants you to. To go on increasing the population, or
piling up wealth, is not progress. Developing is not a matter of numbers. If society multiplies beyond limit, people
would start killing one another.
Man would first feed fat on animals and birds. Then, perhaps, on his own children. If he accepts that there is any
value in desire and anger, there is not the least doubt that man will end up by eating man. Doing good to the world
means showing mankind the pure and beautiful path of virtue. If by freeing itself from lust and anger the race of
man disappears from the earth, it will reappear on Mars. There is no need to worry. The unseen God pervades the
universe. He will take care of us.
Therefore, first let us become free. There is no need to look very far into the future. Do not worry about all
creation and entire human race. Increase your own moral power. Fling aside desire and anger, "Free you own neck
from the noose first." This would be achievement enough.
24. There is joy in standing on the shore and watching from afar the surge of the sea of samsara. But what joy is
there in the sea for the man who is drowning in it, with his eyes and nose full of water? The saints stand on the
shore and enjoy the sight of the sea. Unless we bring into our lives this saintly attitude of remaining aloof from
samsara, we can have no joy. Be like the lotus-leaf, and let the water roll off you.
The Buddha has said, "The saints stand on the summit of the hill, and look down at samsara and find it trivial." If
you, too, climb to the top and look down, this vast expanse would appear trivial. And your mind will not be drawn to
samsara.
The Lord, in this Chapter, exhorts us to give up the demonic and acquire the divine qualities. Come, let us make the
effort.
ANOTHER SUPPLEMENT : PROGRAMME FOR THE SEEKER
A disciplined life frees the mind
1. Dear brothers, we are slowly approaching the end of our study. In the Fifteenth Chapter, we saw the complete
science of life. The Sixteenth Chapter was a supplement. In the mind of man and in society which is its image, a
great war rages between two attitudes, two ways of living, two sets of qualities. Of these we should develop the
divine qualities - that was the teaching contained in the first supplement, the Sixteenth Chapter.
To day, in the Seventeenth Chapter, we come to the second supplement. Looked at in one way, we can call this the

yoga of "karya-krama," of regularity in action. The Gita here indicates our daily routine. Today we shall examine the
programme for every day.
2. If we wish our nature to be free and joyous, we should bring our activities into same order. Our daily actions
should proceed on an accepted basis. It is only when our life proceeds within bounds and in an accepted, disciplined
way, that the mind can be free. The river flows at its own sweet will, but the flood is bound in the two banks. If it
were not thus bound, its freedom would be wasted. Keep before your eyes the example of the jnani, the seer.
The Sun is the teacher of the seers. The Lord taught karma-yoga first to the Sun. Then, from the Sun, it came to
Manu, that is, to man the thinker. The Sun is free and independent. He is regular - it is in this regularity that the
essence of his freedom lies. We have seen from experience that, if we are in the habit of walking regularly on the
same road, we are able to think about other things while walking, without paying attention to our steps.

If we walk on a new road every day, all our attention is concentrated on the road. Then the mind can have no
freedom. It follows that, in order that life may not be burdensome but joyful, we should limit our activities and
order them aright.
3. Therefore the Lord sets down in this Chapter a programme of action. At our birth we are born into three
orders. The Gita has laid down this programme in order that man, may fulfill the functions of these three orders
and make his life happy. What are these three? The first is the body that wraps us. The second is the vast
universe that surrounds us, the boundless creation of which we are a part.
The society into which we are born, our parents, our brothers and sisters, our neighbors - these form the third.
Every day we use these three orders, we wear them out. The Gita wishes that we should try unremittingly to
replenish what is lost through us, and thus make our life fruitful. We should perform without any thought of self
these three sets of duties we were born with. Yes, we should fulfill these duties, but what is the method of doing
so?
The method is to combine yajna, dana and tapas, sacrifice, the giving of gifts and austerity. These words we know,
but not their meaning. If we understand their meaning and bring it into our lives, body, nature and society all the
three orders will benefit and our whole life will shine with freedom and joy.
The yoga of activity - three kinds
4. To understand this, let us first see what "yajna" means. Every day we make use of Nature. If a hundred of us
crowd together in one spot for a day, that part of Nature appears spoilt. We foul the atmosphere and mess up the
whole place. In eating food we consume creation, little by little. We should make up for it. It is for this that the
institution of yajna is created.
What is the purpose of yajna? To make up for the harm that has been caused to creation - this is yajna. We have
been ploughing the earth for thousands of years and thus impoverishing it. Yajna says, "Return its strength to the
soil. Plough the land and feed it with sunlight. Give it manure." To make good the loss, that is one purpose of yajna.
Another purpose is to purify the things we use. We use the well and make the place all round it dirty and slushy.
This part of creation, thus disfigured, we should clean up. We have to remove the dirt. We should make up for the
loss and we should purify. In addition to these, we should do a little direct construction. This too is included in
yajna. If we wear clothes, we should spin a little every day and make something new. Growing cotton, raising crops,
spinning and weaving, all these are acts of yajna, sacrifice. Whatever we do in a yajna should not be done for our
own sake but with the feeling that it is one's duty to make up for the loss that one has caused.
This is not altruism. We are, from the beginning, debtors. We are born into the world with a load of debt on our
heads. Whatever we do to discharge this debt is yajna or service, not altruism. By this service we must discharge
our debt. At every step we use the order of creation. Therefore, we have to do yajna to replenish loss, to purify
things and to create new things.
5. The second order is our human society. Father, mother, teacher, friend, all these toil for our sake. "Dana," the
rite of giving, was instituted in order to discharge this debt to society. This, and not doing good to others, is its
meaning. I have received for society boundless service. When I came into this world, I was weak and helpless. This
society brought me up so that I, then so little, have grown so big. Therefore, in my turn should serve society.
"Doing good" is serving someone from whom we have received no service.
But in this case we have already received everything from society. The service that we render to free ourselves
from this debt to society, is dana. To help human society to progress is dana. The effort made to replenish
Nature's loss is yajna; the help given through body, mind, substance and other means to discharge the debt to
society is dana.

6. Besides these, there is the third order, that of the body. This too wears out day by day. We wear out by use of
our mind, our knowledge, our senses. Tapas, austerity, has been prescribed in order to remove the defects and
distortions that arise in the body.
7. Thus it is our duty to act in such a way that the work of these three orders - Nature, society and the body may proceed smoothly and efficiently. We create any number of good and bad institutions; but these three orders
were not instituted by us.
They have come to us naturally. They are not put together by any man. Therefore it is our natural dharma to
replenish through yajna, dana and tapas the wear and tear in these three orders. If we act in this way, all the
energy in us will be harnessed to this purpose. There will be nothing left for other things. We shall need all our
energy to keep these three orders - Nature, society and the body - in good condition.
If we too could say like Kabir, "Lord, I am returning the shawl just as you gave it to me. See it for yourself," that
would be reward enough. But in order to deserve this reward, we should bring into actual practice the triple
programme of yajna, dana and tapas. Here we have regarded yajna, dana and tapas as if they were three different
things, but to tell the truth, there is no difference between them.
For the three orders of Nature, society and the body are not absolutely distinct. Society is not outside creation;
nor for that matter is the body. These three together make up the beautiful order of Nature. The creative effort
we make, the dana we give and the tapas we perform, all these can be called yajna in the comprehensive sense. The
Gita in the Forth Chapter speaks of yajnas like the yajna of dravya, matter and that of tapas, austerity.
All the service we render to these three orders will take the form of yajna. But it is necessary to keep this service
disinterested. In this there can be no room whatever for expecting any fruit, for we have already received the
fruit. The burden of debt has already settled on our heads. What we have taken, we must now return.
Through yajna we maintain equilibrium in Nature, through dana in society, and through tapas in the body. Thus this
programme is intended to preserve the state of balance in all the three orders. Through this, purity is attained and
evil thoughts eliminated.
8. For the sake of this service, it is necessary to take some food. Eating too is a part of yajna. The Gita calls this
eating of food "aahaara," offerings. As the engine needs coal, the body needs food for its fuel. Although this
offering of food is not in itself yajna, it is clearly an element in the fulfillment of yajna. To fetch a flower from
the garden and place it on the head of the image is worship; but so too is working in the garden to produce the
flowers.
Any action performed for the sake of yajna is also a kind of worship. It is only when we offer food to the body
that it will serve our purpose. Any action which is a means to the performance of yajna is itself yajna. The Gita
calls these actions "ancillary actions," acts of yajna. The offerings I make to the body to sustain it for service are
yajna. The food accepted for the sake of service is holy.
9. Again, all these things must spring from sincere devotion. The inward attitude should be one of surrendering all
service to the Lord. This is a great thing. Without an attitude of surrender to the Lord, one cannot be full of
service. If we forget what is most important, surrender to the Lord, we shall get nowhere.
Making the means pure
10. But then, when can we surrender all our action to the Lord? Only when they are sattvik, purified. Then and only
then, can we do so. Yajna, dana, tapas, all should be made pure. We saw in the Fourteenth Chapter the philosophy of
making our actions sattvik. In this Chapter, the Gita explains its application.
11. In this plan of purification, the Gita has two aims. The service that is being rendered to the world through my
external actions of yajna, dana and tapas, can itself, viewed from within, be described a spiritual exercise. The

service of creation and the development of the spirit do not demand two different courses of action : service and
spiritual growth are not two different things. For both, the effort made, the action performed is the same.
And even this action has at last to be surrendered to the Lord. Service to society, spiritual effort, and the
attitude of surrender to the Lord, - this yoga, this composite result, must flow from the same action.
12. Two things are needed to make yajna sattvik. They are avoiding fruitless actions and also the desire for fruit.
If there is expectation of fruit in yajna, it becomes rajasik : if it is fruitless, it becomes tamasik.
Spinning is yajna. But if we do not inform it with spirit, and our mind is not one-pointed, the sutra-yajna will become
lifeless. Unless the mind within joins the hand working outwards, the whole action departs from the prescribed
order.
And disorderly actions become lifeless. Into such action, tamas enters. Through it, no noble thing can be created.
From it, no fruit will grow. Even though there is no desire of fruit in performing yajna, it ought to yield noble fruit?
If the mind is not in the action, if the spirit is not in it, then it becomes a burden. How then can it yield good fruit?
If the outward action goes wrong, it must be because the mind did not accompany it.
Therefore, pour your soul into the action. Join the outward with the inward. In order to discharge our debt to
creation, we must produce noble fruit. One should not allow action to become fruitless; that is why it is essential
that inward feeling should combine with outward action according to rule and order.
13. When in this way, disinterestedness finds place in our hearts and fruitful action goes on according to rule, our
mind and heart will become increasingly pure.
What is the touchstone of inward purity? Examine the outward action, if that is not flawless and beautiful, we may
take it there is impurity in the mind too. When does beauty come out in action? On the action performed with pure
heart and unstinted effort, the Lord sets the seal of His approval, His grace. When the Lord, well-pleased, touches
the action with the hand of love, beauty appears there. Beauty is the grace of the Lord granted to pure and
unremitting effort.
When the sculptor gets absorbed in carving, he feels that this beautiful image was not shaped by his hands. As he
goes on chiseling, at the last moment, somehow, from somewhere, beauty comes of itself and settles there.
Without chitta suddhi, inward purity, how can the art of God manifest itself? The beauty, the loveliness of the
image, is nothing but the beauty of the sculptor's soul that has been poured into it.
The image is an image of our mind. All our actions are images of our mind. If our mind is beautiful, its image in the
medium of action will also be beautiful. We should judge the purity of outward action by the purity of the mind, and
the purity of the mind by the purity of outward action.
14. One word more! And this is, in all these actions mantra too is necessary. Action without mantra is meaningless.
While spinning, bear this mantra in your heart : "Through this thread I tie myself to the poor in this land."
If we work for hours on end, but without this mantra in our heart, it is all wasted. The mind will not attain purity
through this action. Consider spinning. If we apply to the action this mantra, that the Lord hidden in the cotton
manifests Himself in the form of the thread, the action will then become truly pure and beautiful. It will become
worship, service to the people and to God. In the tiny mouth of the child Krishna, mother Yashoda saw the whole
Creation. In this thread too, charged with mantra, you will begin to see the whole universe.
Purity in Food
15. For true service, purity in food is necessary. As is the food, so is the mind. The food we eat should be
regulated. Not what food we take, but how much we take, is the more important question. It does matter what
food we choose to eat, but it matters even more that it is in right measure.

16. Whatever we eat will necessarily have its effects. What do we eat for? That good service may be done. Eating
too forms a part of yajna. Look at our food with the bhavana that it is necessary in order to make the yajna of
service yield fruit. Food should be pure and clean. The food that a man eats can never be too pure. Our society has
performed enough tapas for the sake of purity in food. In India, many efforts have been made towards this.
Thousands of years have passed in these experiments. We cannot tell how much tapas has gone into them.
It is only in India that many entire communities have freed themselves of meat-eating. Even those who eat meat
give it a secondary place and do not take it every day, they even feel that they are doing something improper;
these too have in their minds given up meat.It was to restrict meat-eating that yajnas were first developed, and it
was again for the same purpose that yajna was latter abandoned. Lord Krishna changed the very meaning of the
word "yajna." Sri Krishna increased the importance of milk. The wonderful things that Krishna did are not few : but
which Krishna are the people of India mad after?
The name most dear to the people of India is "Gopal-Krishna." The young and the old, every one knows and loves
Krishna, the cow-herd, with the flute at His lips, in the midst of his cows. The great benefit of learning to cherish
the cow was that people gave up meat-eating. Cow's milk came to be valued, and meat-eating fell off in importance.
17. Still, it is not as if perfect purity in food has been attained. We should now make efforts for further progress.
The Bengalis eat fish and so many people are surprised at this. But it is not right that we should condemn them for
this. Bengal produces only rice and that does not provide enough nutrition for the body. We shall have to conduct
experiments to find out what vegetable substitutes can be found for fish. For this purpose men of heroic sacrifice
will be born. It is such people who lead society forward.
The Sun keeps burning and that is way, wherever we go, we are able to maintain our normal temperature and remain
alive.When in a society shining suns of vairagya, desirelessness, appear and, breaking the bonds of environment with
the power of faith, fly without wings into the sky of ideal then we ordinary people acquire the little vairagya that is
useful in the world. I often think, on such occasions, of how much tapas the rishis had to perform to stop meateating and how many lives had to be sacrificed!
18. By now our society has to this extent attained purity in food. This treasure which our ancestors have earned
through endless sacrifice, let us not lose it. Do not let go this achievement of Indian culture. It is not enough that
we somehow manage to exist. That is easy. Even the animals do so. Then, are we like the animals? No, there is a
difference.
The growth of this difference is the growth of culture. Our country has conducted strenuous experiments in giving
up meat-eating. Let us continue them. At any rate, let us maintain our present position and not go back.
I stress this because at present a great many people have begun to show a liking for meat. Today, the cultures of
the East and of the West are influencing each other. I am confident that the ultimate outcome of this will be good.
The impact of Western culture disturbs our insensible beliefs. When blind faith is shaken there is no harm in it.
What is good will remain, and what is bad will be destroyed. But blind unbelief should not replace blind belief. It is
not as if belief alone can be blind, that it has monopoly of blindness. Unbelief too can be blind. People have begun to
think again about meat-eating.
The appearance of a new idea, whatever it may be, delights me. It shows signs of wakefulness. But if one wanders
around rubbing one's eyes, not yet fully awake one may stumble and fall. Therefore, until one is fully awake and can
see steadily, it is good that one keeps in check one's hands and feet. Consider well, look carefully up and down,
from right and left, inside and out, and all round. Use the scissors of the mind on dharma. The dharma that can be
cut up by thought is worthless; let it go. That which your scissors cannot cut, but which, on the contrary, shatters
your scissors, that is true dharma. Dharma is not afraid of thought. Therefore think; but do not rush into action.
If you do something while only half awake, you will fall down. However powerful the thought, forbear from action
for a while. Exercise discipline. Do not throw away the virtue stored up for you.
The Gita's Programme for harmonious living

19. Purity of food keeps the mind pure. The body gains strength. One is able to do good to society. Both the
individual and society are happy. There will be no conflict in a society where yajna, dana and tapas are found, where
actions take place according to rule and are accompanied by mantra, contemplation.
As, when two mirrors face each other, each is reflected in other, in the same way, true to the laws of reflection,
the individual and the society will mutually strengthen peace. My happiness is that of society, and society's is mine.
We can examine each of these and find that they are both one. We shall experience advaita, oneness, everywhere.
Separateness and disloyalty disappear. The Gita shows us the way of establishing such an order. If we follow the
Gita's plan in our daily programme of action, how good it would be!
20. But today there is conflict between the individual and society. How this conflict can be resolved is the talk
everywhere. Where does the individual stop and society begin? Which is primary and which is secondary? Which is
superior? Upholders of individualism regard society as lifeless. When the sepoy comes before him, the commander
speaks to him gently. He would even use the honorific plural.
But his words of command to the regiment would be peremptory. It is as if he considers the regiment as a lifeless
log to be kicked about hither and thither on the field. We see, here too, how the individual is alive, but the
collective is lifeless. Here you are, two or three hundred people in front of me. Whether you like it or not, I go on
speaking to you; I keep saying whatever occurs to me. I treat you as if you were lifeless.
But if any of you approach me, I shall have to listen carefully and answer questions after a great deal of thinking.
But now, I make you sit still here for hours together.
'Society is inert, the individual is conscious' - so say some. Others magnify the collective. My hair has fallen, my
hand is broken, my eyes are gone, my teeth have dropped out. In addition to this, one lung is useless. If in spite of
it all I live, it is because each organ, looked at separately, has no life of its own. If any one of them perishes, the
whole does not perish.
The collective, the body, continues to live and move. Thus we have two contradictory ways of thinking. The
conclusions you come to, depend on your point of view. Creation assumes the color of the spectacles you wear.
21. Some give more importance to the individual, some to society. This is because of the spread in society of the
concept of struggle for existence. But is existence meant for struggle? Rather than this, why don't we die?
Conflict is on the side of death. It is because of this, that we distinguish between svaartha and paramaartha,
between one's own good and supreme good, the good of the Self.
God bless the fellow who first thought up the difference between svaartha and paramaartha. Should we not honor
the mind which created the illusion of a difference where none really exists? It is wonderful how he set up this
difference and taught it to the people. This is like the Great Wall of China; like making a boundary of the horizon
and imagining that nothing exists beyond it. The reason for all this the absence of a life lived as yajna.
That is why the difference between the individual and society has come about. But in reality it is impossible to
separate the individual and society. If a curtain is hung in the middle of a room to divide it into two and it is blown
about by the wind, sometimes one part appears larger and sometimes other. The size of the compartment is not
fixed and permanent; it depends on the wind. The Gita tanscends these quarrels. These quarrels are imaginary. But
the Gita says, "Keep within the bounds of inner purity.
Then no conflict will arise between the good of the individual and that of the society. They will not obstruct each
other." What the Gita specially does is to remove this difference, this conflict. Even if there is a single individual
who obeys the discipline of the Gita, the whole country will prosper because of that single man. A nation consists of
individuals in it. A country in which there are no such individuals, men of knowledge and disciplined conduct - how
can we call it a nation? What is India? India is Rabindranath, India is Gandhi and a few other people like them. The
outside world conceives of India in terms of few such individuals.
Take three or four names from ancient times, four or five from the Middle Ages, and seven or eight of today, add
to them the Himalayas and the Ganga, and we have India. This is the definition of India. The rest is only a

commentary on it, an expansion of it. From milk we get curds, and from curds butter-milk and butter; there is no
conflict. To determine the quality of the milk, we determine its butter coefficient.
The worth of a society is judged by its individuals. There is no conflict between the individual and the society. How
can there be? Even between one individual and another, there should be no conflict. If one is better endowed than
another, what does it matter? No one should suffer privation, and the riches of the rich should benefit the
society. That is enough. Does it make any difference whether my money is in my left pocket or my right pocket?
After all, both are mine. When someone is rich, I am rich, the nation is rich - we establish this in practice.
But we erect these walls of difference. If the body and the head are separated they would both die. Therefore, do
not separate the individual and the society. The Gita teaches just this, how one and the same action destroys the
difference between svaartha and paramaartha, the good of oneself and the good of the Self.
Between the air in this room and the unbounded atmosphere without, there is neither difference nor conflict. If I
imagine that there is conflict and shut the doors and windows, I shall only be suffocated to death. If assuming that
there is no conflict, I throw open the room the boundless air flows into it. The moment I cut off my land and my
house from those of others, that very moment I am cheated of infinite wealth.
If this one little house of mine is burnt down or collapses, I think that all is lost, I cry and beat my breast. But why
should I do so? Why weep and lament? Why form a narrow conception at first and then cry? When I say that this
five hundred rupees is mine, I forfeit the infinite riches of Creation. When I think that these two are my
brothers, all other countless brothers in the world are cut off from me. We do not think of this.
Look how small and narrow a man makes himself. In truth, svaartha should be paramaartha, one's own good should
be supreme good. The Gita shows such an easy and beautiful way, by which the highest co-operation and harmony
can develop between the individual and society.
22. What opposition is there between the tongue and the stomach? We should give to the tongue the amount of
food the stomach needs. When the stomach says enough, one should stop feeding the tongue.
The stomach is one organ, the tongue is another. I am the king of both. There is perfect oneness among all these
organs. Where did you bring it from, this unhappy conflict? Just as between the different limbs and the organs of
the body there is no conflict, but only harmony and co-operation, so too between the individuals in society.
It is in order to develop this co-operation in society that the Gita teaches us the system of action consisting of

yajna, dana and tapas, performed in purity of heart. Through such action both the individual and society prosper.
The man whose life is lived as yajna belongs to everybody. Each child feels that his mother loves him alone. In the
same way, everyone feels that such a person belongs to him. He is dear and acceptable to the whole world. To
everyone it appears that he is their life, their friend, their comrade. "Happy is the man whom all the world loves,"
says Samartha Ramadas. The Gita teaches us how to live such a life.
The mantra of dedication
23. The Gita says that, after making one's life a yajna, one should dedicate it entirely to the Lord. After one's life
has become pure service, why should one surrender it further to the Lord? We say easily enough that life should
become full of service, but it is very difficult to make it so. It may be possible at last, and that to some extent,
after innumerable births.
Even if all actions are filled with service, made up entirely of service, even then there is no saying that they have
become full of worship too. Therefore with the mantra of 'om tat sat', we should surrender all action to the Lord.
It is difficult for acts of service to be full service, unmixed with baser metal. For, even in paramaartha, svaartha
comes in; even in serving the Supreme, selfishness comes in.

Absolute paramaartha is not possible. There can be no action in which there is no trace of selfishness whatever.
Therefore, we should wish that, day after day, more and more, disinterested and unselfish actions should take
place through our hands. If we wish that our service should become progressively purer, we should surrender all
our actions to the Lord. Jnanadev has said, "To the bhakta, sweet as Nectar is the Name; the yogi labours for the
art of living."
But the sweetness of the Name and the art of living are not different. There is harmony between the sound of the
Name within and the practice of the art of life without. The yogi and the bhakta are both one. When we surrender
our action to the Lord, svaartha, paraartha and paramaartha - one's own good, other's good and supreme good - all
become one. 'You' and 'I', at first so much apart should be made one.
'You' and 'I' together make up 'We'. Now 'We' and "He" must be brought together. First I must achieve oneness
with this creation, and then oneness with the Lord. It is this idea that is conveyed by the mantra 'om tat sat.'
24. The names of God are countless. Vyasa has made the 'Vishnusahasranaama,' 'The Thousand Names of Vishnu,'
out of them. All the names that we can think of are His. Whatever name springs in our mind, let us see its meaning
in Creation, and shape our life in accordance with it.
Seeing in Creation that name of the Lord which shines in our heart, let us fashion ourselves in its image. I call this
the 'tripadda gaayatri', the mantra with three feet. Let us take the name, 'dayaamaya,' 'All Compassionate.' We
should walk in the light of the knowledge that He is indeed the All-Compassionate, 'rahim'. Now let us open our
eyes and see in Creation this Lord, the Ocean of Compassion. The Lord gives to every child a mother to serve it,
and air for it to breathe. Seeing this scheme of Compassion in the universe, let us fill our own lives with
compassion. The Gita gives the name of Lord which was most current in the age. That is 'om tat sat.'
25. 'Om' means 'Yes, God exists.' Even in this twentieth century God exists. 'Sa eva adya sa u shvah' - He alone
exists today; yesterday He alone was, and tomorrow He alone will be. He is permanent. Creation, is permanent. And
I have girded my loins and am ready to serve. I am the sadhaka, the seeker, He is the Lord; this Creation is the
offering and the means of worship.
It is only when our hearts are filled with this feeling that we can say 'om' has entered our being. He exists, I
exist, and my worship too goes on - thus the feeling of 'om' should settle in our minds and find expression in our
sadhana, our work. Whenever we see the sun, we see it with its rays. It cannot exist without them. It never
forgets its rays. In the same way, whenever any one looks at us, we should be seen with our sadhana, our work. It is
only then that we shall have made 'om' our own.
Then comes 'sat.' The Lord is 'sat', that is, He is good; He is auspicious. Be filled with this bhavana, this feeling,
and in Creation, enjoy His benignity. Look at the trough in the water! When you fill a pitcher from the tank, the
depression is filled up in a moment. How benign, how loving. A river cannot tolerate emptiness. It runs; forward to
fill it up.

"nadii vegena shuddhyati"
The river of Creation purifies itself by speed. All Creation is good, is auspicious. Let your action too be likewise.
In order to make our own this 'sat,' this name of the Lord, all our actions should be pure and full of bhakti. Just as
the soma juice is filtered for the sacrifice, we too should examine all our actions and efforts constantly and make
sure that they are flawless.
'Tat' now remains. 'Tat' means 'that', the other, something unattached to Creation. The Supreme is different
from Creation and unattached to it.
As the sun rises, the lotuses bloom, the birds begin to fly and darkness disappears. But the sun remains afar, quite
aloof from the changes it brings about. When we have attained detachment, when our actions are disinterested, we
may take it that 'tat' has entered into our lives.

26. In this way the Gita teaches us how to take the Vedic Name 'om tat sat' and surrender all our actions to the
Lord. Earlier, the Ninth Chapter spoke of surrendering all actions to the Lord. This is what is said in the shloka
"yat karoshi yadashnaasi" - 'Whatever you do, whatever you eat.'
In the Seventeenth Chapter, this idea is more fully dealt with, that the action which is surrendered to the Lord
should be sattvik, for only then will it be worthy of being offered to the Lord - this is specially stressed here.
The Name of the Lord takes away sin
27. All this is very well. But the question now arises, "This Name, 'om tat sat,' is only for the pure man. What is
the sinner to do? Is there a Name which even in the mouth of a sinner is beautiful?" The Name om tat sat has this
power too. Every one of the names of the Lord has the power to lead us from untruth to truth. It can take us from
sin towards sinless ness. We have to purify our lives little by little. The Lord will surely help. In our weakness He
will support us.
28. If a man asks me, "On one side is a life pure but proud, and on the other, a life sinful but humble; which would
you choose?" Though my tongue may not utter it, I would still feel in my heart of hearts : 'The sin which makes me
think of the Lord, let that sin come to me. If a life of virtue will bring forgetfulness of the Lord then let me
rather have the life of sin that would bring me thought of Him." This does not mean that I plead for a life of sin.
But sin is not so sinful as pride in one's virtue. Tukaram says, "All this knowledge, I fear, my Lord will only hinder
me." Yes, we can do without this greatness. It is far better to be a sinner and grieve.
"The child that is too clever, even the mother pushes him away."
But the ignorant child the mother keeps in her lap. I do not want to have a virtue that is sufficient unto itself. I
would rather be a sinner clinging to the Lord.
The holiness of the Lord can hold all my sins and still survive. Let us try to avoid sins. If we fair, our hearts will
weep, our minds tremble. Then we will remember the Lord. He has been standing by, watching the fun. Cry out to
Him, "I am a sinner; I have therefore come to Your door." The virtuous man has a right to think of the Lord
because he is virtuous. The sinner has a right to think of the Lord because he is a sinner.
CONCLUSION - THE FULFILLMENT OF FRUIT - THE GRACE OF THE LORD
Arjuna's last question
1. My brothers, now by the grace of the Lord, we have reached the Eighteenth Chapter. In this world of chance
and change and mutability, the fulfillment of any resolve depends on the will of the Lord. And in jail, at every step,
one experiences uncertainty. To start anything in jail and to expect to conclude it here is far-fetched. When we
started this study of the Gita, we did not expect that it would be possible to finish it here. But by the will of God
we are approaching the end.
2. In the Fourteenth Chapter life, that is all our activity, was divided into three classes, saattvik, rajasik and
tamasik. Of the three, we learnt that we should give up the rajasik and the tamasik and take to the saattvik. Then,
in the Seventeenth Chapter, the same was treated in a different way. Yajna, dana and tapas, sacrifice, gifts and
austerity, or, in one word, yajna, sacrifice, is the essence of life.
Then, in the Seventeenth Chapter, it was suggested that actions like eating, which are ancillary to sacrifice, should
be accepted only as a form of sacrifice, and only after making them saattvik. We should accept only those actions
which are saattvik in nature and come to us in the form of sacrifice; it is proper that we give up all other kinds of
action. We have also seen why we should constantly remember the mantra, 'om tat sat'.

'Om' stands for constantly, 'tat' for detachment, and 'sat' for the saattvik nature, for purity. In our endeavor,
there should be constancy, detachment and purity. Only then can we surrender it to the Lord. From all this it

appears that some actions should be done and others given up. If we look at the whole message of the Gita, we are
taught in place after place that we should not renounce action. The Gita speaks of the renunciation of the fruits of
action.
Everywhere in the Gita it is taught "Go on constantly performing action, but keep renouncing the fruits of it. This
is one side of it. The other appears to be that we should perform some actions and renounce others. Therefore, in
the beginning of the Eighteenth Chapter Arjuna asks the final question, "On the one hand, it is said that no matter
what action we do, we should first renounce the fruit. It is said on the other that some actions must perforce be
renounced and others are worth performing.
How are these two statements to be reconciled?" This question is framed so that we may understand clearly the
direction in which life should proceed. It seeks to understand the secret of the renunciation of fruit. In what the
shastras call 'sannyaas' (renunciation) action should be renounced in its very form and nature. That is, the form of
action is itself to be renounced. But in 'tyaaga' sacrifice, what is renounced is not the action, but the fruit of it.
Now the question is, "For the renunciation of fruit that the Gita enjoins, is it necessary to renounce actions itself?
Tested by the touchstone of the renunciation of fruit, is there any benefit to be derived from sannyaasa, the
renunciation of action? Where are the limits of sannyaasa placed? Where and what are the limits of phalatyaaga
and sannyaasa, renunciation of fruit and renunciation of action? This is Arjuna's question.
Renunciation of fruit - the sovereign touchstone
3. In reply to this question, the Lord has said one thing clearly, that the touchstone of renunciation of fruit is of
universal application. The principle of renunciation of fruit can be applied everywhere. There is no conflict between
renouncing the fruit of all actions and renouncing rajasik and tamasik actions. The nature of some of the actions is
such that, if we apply to them the device of renouncing the fruit, they fall off of themselves.
Performing actions after renouncing fruit means just this that some actions are to be given up. It, naturally,
includes the direct renunciation of these actions.
4. Let us consider this matter a little more deeply. When we say, "The actions that are interested, that spring
from desire, do them after renouncing the fruit," we cut the ground from under their feet. Faced with
renunciation of fruit, actions that spring from desire and actions that are forbidden cannot stand.
The act with renunciation of fruit is not something merely artificial designed, or mechanical. When this test is
applied, it becomes clear of itself what actions should be performed, and what should not be. Some people
complain, "The Gita merely teaches us to perform actions renouncing the fruit, but it does not tell us what actions
to perform."
But it only appears so; it is not really so. Because, once it is said, "Perform action after renouncing the fruit," it
becomes clear what actions we should perform and what not. Violent actions, actions filled with falsehood, actions
like theft - it is quite impossible to perform them after renouncing the fruit. The moment such actions are tested
on the touchstone of renunciation of fruit, they simply disappear. When the light of the sun spreads, all objects
begin to look bright, but does the darkness too appear bright?
No, it disappears altogether. This is the condition of forbidden and interested actions. We must test all our
actions on the touchstone of renunciation of fruit. Renunciation of fruit is the test for performing any action.
When this test is applied, interested actions show themselves up as unworthy. They are fit for sannyaasa, fit only
to be renounced. What now remains is only pure saattvik action.
Such actions should be performed without egoism. Renouncing interested actions is itself action. Apply the scissors
of renunciation of fruit to this action too. Then the renunciation of interested action will become natural. Thus we
have seen things. The first is that, whatever we do, we should do it after renouncing the fruit. The second is that
rajasik and tamasik actions - prohibited and interested actions - when tested on the touchstone of renunciation of
fruit, fall off by themselves. The third is that, even to giving up of such actions the scissors of phalatyaaga,

renunciation of fruit, should be applied. We should not give room to the egoism which says, "How much have I
renounced!"
5. Why should rajasik and tamasik actions be given up? Because they are not pure. Being impure, they leave a mark
on the mind of the doer. But on further thought we find that even saattvik action has some defects. Indeed in all
actions there is some imperfection. Take even the svadharma of agriculture. It is pure and saattvik. But even in
agriculture, which, as svadharma, is all yajna, there occurs unavoidably some himsaa, violence.
So many lives are destroyed in ploughing and some other operations. So too when to prevent the surrounding of a
well from becoming slushy, the ground is hardened and plastered. When we open the doors and windows in the
morning and the sunlight enters the house, innumerable lives are destroyed. What we call cleaning up turns out to
be large scale murder. If even in saattvik action performed as one's svadharma there is some flaw, what then are
we to do? That is the question.
6. I have already said that we have yet to develop to the full all the good qualities. We have tasted so far only a
drop of qualities like jnana, bhakti, sevaa, ahimsaa - knowledge, devotion, service, non-violence - and so on. It is not
as if we really know them fully. Life progresses by experience. In the Middle Ages there was a theory that,
because of the violence in agriculture, non violent person should not take to it. He could be a merchant.
Producing food was considered a sin, but not buying and selling it. But by shirking action in this way, we can do no
good to ourselves. If one goes on contracting one 's actions in this way, one will end by destroying oneself. As man
thinks of ways of freeing himself from action, action multiplies itself. In order that you may trade in grain, has not
someone else to grow the grain?
Then, are you too not responsible for the violence involved in growing it? If it is a sin to grow cotton, it is equally a
sin to sell it. There may be something wrong in growing cotton, but it is wrong to think of giving it up on that
account. To push away all actions, saying that neither this, nor that, and indeed nothing, should be done - in this
attitude there is no true compassion. On the other hand, this is the end of compassion. When the leaves are
plucked, the tree does not die; on the contrary, it puts forth fresh leaves. In narrowing one's action, one narrows
one's soul.
The true way of freeing oneself from activity
7. Now the question is, "If there is defect in all actions, then why should we not give them up all?" The answer to
this has already been given once. The concept of giving up all actions is very beautiful. The thought of it fascinates
one. But how is one to give up these countless actions? Will the method of giving up rajasik and tamasik actions
serve for saattvik actions too?
How to save oneself from those sattvik actions that are defective? This would be like 'sendraaya taakshakaaya
svaahaa,' 'offering an oblation of Takshaka with Indra.' The funny thing is that when a man does this, not only does
Indra, the immortal, not die, but Takshaka, the mortal, escapes death and grows stronger. In saattvik action there
is merit, but a little defect. But if, because there is some evil mixed up with the good, you would offer up, renounce
the good along with the evil, not only will the good, because of its strength, not perish, but evil will certainly go on
increasing.
By this foolish kind to mixed sacrifice, the Indra of merit does not indeed perish, but the Takshaka of evil, though
mortal will escape death. How then are we to renounce them? If we drive away the cat because it is a nuisance, the
nuisance of the mice will increase. If we destroy the snakes because they do harm, other creatures multiply and
destroy the crops and, as a result, thousands of people may die. Therefore, renunciation must be accompanied with
discrimination.
8. Machindranath told Gorakhnath, "Wash this boy and bring him back." Gorakhnath caught hold of the boy's feet,
dashed his head against a stone and spread him on a hedge to dry. Machindranath asked him, "Have you brought the
boy washed?" Gorakhnath answered, "I have washed him white and put him out to dry." Is a boy washed this way?
We don't wash clothes and boys in the same way. There is a lot of difference between the two.

So, too, there is a lot of difference between renouncing rajasik and tamasik actions and renouncing saattvik
actions. Saattvik actions should be renounced in a special way. Unwise actions can only produce topsy turvy results.
Tukaram has said,
"Desire to indulge wells up within from sacrifice.
What then shall I do, O Lord?"
When we make little sacrifice, a great desire to indulge comes and sits on our necks. Thus even the little sacrifice
is belied. To compensate for a little sacrifice, they put up huge monuments. Than these, that old hut was better. It
was good enough. It is better to continue to keep one's coat and turban than to wear nothing but a lion-cloth and to
surround oneself with wealth and pleasure. Therefore the Lord has explained separately the way of renouncing
saattvik actions.
All the saattvik actions must be done, but we should pluck and throw away the fruit. Some actions should be
utterly rooted out, while of others only the fruit should be plucked and thrown away. If there is a stain on the
body, it can be washed off : but if the skin itself is dark in color, what is the good of giving it a coat of whitewash? Let the dark color remain. Why do you pay attention to it? Do not consider it inauspicious.
9. Once there was a man who, feeling that there was something inauspicious about his house, left it and went and
settled in another village. That in turn seemed dirty to him, and he went away to the forest. There, as he sat under
a mango tree, a bird's droppings fell on his head. He said, "This forest too is unfriendly", and went and stood in a
river. In the river, the sight of the big fish eating up the small fish filled him with disgust.
The whole of creation," he concluded, "is unkind". "There is no way out except through death." So he came out of
the water and kindled a fire. Then a gentleman who was passing by said, "My brother, why are you preparing to
die?" He replied, "Because the whole world is inauspicious." Then man said, "If this unclean body of your, this mass
of flesh, begins to burn, how it would stink! I live close by. Where could I go? When a single hair burns, it smells so
awful!
And how, all this flesh of yours will burn! Just think a little of the stench you will spread." Then the man was
bewildered and exclaimed, "If one can neither live in this world nor die in it, what is one to do?"
10. That is to say, if we go about condemning everything as bad and inauspicious, and rejecting it, we simply cannot
carry on. If you try to avoid small actions, other big actions will come and sit on your head. It is the nature of
action that we do not get rid of it by giving up its external form.
If a man spends his energies on resisting the actions which come to him naturally with the current, if he swims
against the current, he will in the end succumb to weariness and be swept off by the stream. He should try to cross
the stream with the help of actions which flow with the current. Then, little by little, actions will cease on their
own accord. Even without renunciation of action, activity will fall off. Action will not leave us, but activity will
disappear.
11. Between action and activity there is a difference. For example, there is a big commotion somewhere, and we
want to stop it. A policeman shouts at the top of his voice, "SILENCE!" To put end to the noise there, he had to
perform the intense action of shouting aloud. Another person comes up there and merely lifts his finger. With only
this, the people become quiet. A third person has but to come there, and stillness descends.
One had to exert himself and perform an action, the action of the second was a gentle gesture; the action of the
third was subtle. The activity becomes progressively less; but all three alike do the work of calming the people. As
inward purity grows, the effort in the action becomes less. From effort to gentleness, from gentleness to subtlety,
and from subtlety to nothingness. Action is one thing, effort or activity is another. Action is that which is most
desired by the doer - this is the definition of action. The grammarian Panini says, "kartub iipsitatamam karma."
That is, in a sentence, "that which the subject - the karta, (the doer) - most desires to encompass is the object the karma, (the action)."
Browning has written:

"An unbelieving Pope won't do you say.
It's like those eerie stories nurses tell,
Of how some actor played Death on a stage
With paste-board crown, sham orb and tinseled dart.
And called himself the monarch of the world ...
Got touched upon the sleeve familiarly
By Death himself. Thus God might touch a Pope
At unawares, as what this baubles mean.
And whose part he presumed to play just now?"
The pope would say, "I play the part because it is possible that as I go on acting, as I go through the motions of
the part, some day, without my even realizing it, faith will move within me." Therefore, we should go on working
without thinking of the fruit. Then little, we shall attain the state of action-lessness.

Svadharma: the final analysis
13. That is, we should completely give up rajasik and tamasik actions and perform saattvik actions. While doing so,
we should retain the perception that we should not give up the saattvik action that comes to us in an easy and
natural way, even though it has some defects. If there are defects, let them be. If you try to turn your back on
them, other defects will overtake you.
Let your crooked nose remain as it is. If you attempt to cut it and improve it, you will only make it more frightful.
It is good enough as it is. Though defective, because they come naturally, saattvik actions should not be given up.
They must be performed, but their fruit should be renounced.
14. There is one thing more to say. The actions that are not yours by nature, even if they seem to you easy to
perform, do not perform them. Do only the actions that fall to you naturally.
Do not run about and get caught in the whirlpool of other new actions. The actions that have to be artificially put
together, keep away from them, however good they may be. Do not be beguiled by them. It is only when an action
comes to us naturally that its fruit can be renounced. If a man runs about on all sides impelled by the greed for
action, imagining that this is good, and that is good, how can he ever give up the fruit? In this way, his whole life
would be a failure.
While thus, for love of the fruit, he desires to perform paradharma, the action that rightly belongs to others, he
will let slip the fruit also; he will have no steadiness in life. The attachment to action will cling to his mind.
Attachment even for sattvik actions should be avoided. If you wish to perform such a variety of saattvik action,
into them too rajas and tamas will enter. Therefore, perform only the saattvik action that falls to you naturally and
easily as your svadharma.
15. Swadeshi dharma, the national dharma, svajatiya dharma, communal dharma; and svakalina dharma, the dharma
of the age - all these come together in svadharma, one's own dharma. These three combine to make up svadharma.
To determine one's svadharma, one should consider what is helpful and appropriate to one's nature and situation,
and what duty falls to one.
You have in you something unique and your own, your 'you-ness', and that is why you are 'you'. In every individual
there is something distinctively his own. The development of a goat depends on its retaining its goat-ness. It should
remain a goat in order to grow. It is not for the goat to wish to be a cow. It is impossible for it to give up the goat-

ness that has come to it through nature. It would have to give up its body, and take a new birth and a new dharma.
But in this birth, goat-ness is sacred to it.
Don't you know the story of the ox and the frog? There is a limit beyond which a frog cannot blow up its body. If it
tried to become as big as an ox, it would only die. It is not right to copy other's forms. That is why it is said that
paradharma, the dharma of others, is terrible and dangerous.
16. Again in svadharma there are two parts. One changes while the other does not. I am not today what I was
yesterday, nor shall I be tomorrow what I am today. I am for ever changing. The svadharma of childhood is just to
grow. In youth, I am full of the power of action, and should use it in the service of society. In maturity others will
get the benefit of my wisdom. While one part of svadharma is thus changing, the other part is unchanging.
If we use the names of the old shastras, we should say, "Man has a varna-dharma and an ashrama-dharma." While
varna-dharma does not change, ashrama-dharma is constantly changing.

Ashrama-dharma changes in the sense that I complete the brahmacharya (students) stage and enter the grihastha
(house-holder) stage, and then through vanaprastha (retirement) to sannyaasa (renunciation). Though the ashrama
changes in this way, there is no change in varna - dharma.
I cannot cross the bounds set by nature. The very effort to do so is false. The 'you-ness' in you, you cannot give
up. This is the basis of varna-dharma. The idea behind varna-dharma is very beautiful. Is varna-dharma absolutely
unchangeable? Is the brahmanhood of the brahmin, the kshatriyahood of the kshatriya, like the goat-ness of the
goat or the cow-ness of the cow?
I accept the varna-dharma is not as inflexible as that; but we should understand its hidden meaning. When the
term 'varna-dharma' is used for a device to maintain a social order, it must necessarily admit of exceptions. We
have to accept these exceptions. The Gita too does so. In other words, understanding aright both these kinds of
dharma, we should push away from us any other dharma, however beautiful and alluring it may be.

Renunciation of fruit - its full meaning
17. From our development so far of the idea of the renunciation of fruit, the following principles emerge :(1) The complete renunciation of rajasik and tamasik actions.
(2) Renouncing the fruit of this renunciation; even about this, let there be no egoism or pride.
(3) Without giving up the forms of saattvik action, renouncing only their fruit.
(4) Those saattvik actions which are to be performed after renouncing the fruit, even if they have imperfections,
should be performed.
(5) By constantly performing such saattvik actions with renunciation of fruit, the mind and heart get purer and
purer, and thus, - from intensity to gentleness, from gentleness to subtlety, from subtlety to nothingness - activity
finally ceases.
(6) Activity disappears, but action - action benefiting the world - continues to take place.
(7) Even of saattvik actions, we should perform only those which come to us naturally. We should keep aloof from
those actions that do not fall to us by nature, no matter how good they seem. We should not be deluded by them.

(8) Even the svadharma that comes to us naturally is of two kinds, one changing, the other permanent, varnadharma does not change, but ashrama-dharma keeps changing. The svadharma that ought to change, we should go
on changing.
18. This will keep Nature pure. Nature should keep continuously flowing. If a stream begins to stagnate, it stinks.
It is the same with ashrama-dharma. Every man starts with his family. For the sake of growth he submits himself
to the bonds of family. Here he acquires many kinds of experience. But if, having become a family man, he gets
caught in it permanently, he will be destroyed. Being part of a family, which was dharma at first, now becomes
adharma; for now that dharma has become a thing that binds him down.
If, out of attachment, he does not give up this old dharma, then a terrible situation arises. One should not have
attachment even to a good thing. From attachment come cruel tragedies. If the germs of tuberculosis enter our
lungs, unawares, they consume our whole life from within. In the same way, if the germs of attachment, through
our carelessness; enter our saattvik actions, then svadharma will rot from within.
Even in that sattvik svadharma the evil odor of rajas and tamas will spread. Therefore, the family, the changing
Svadharma should slip off from us at the right time. The same applies to national dharma too. If, even in national
dharma, out of attachment we begin to think of the good of our nation alone, this patriotism may itself be an
obstacle to our development. When attachment gets a footing in our hearts, our downfall begins.
Attainment is only the last stage of sadhana
19. The truth is that, if you wish to attain the goal of life, then you should seek and find the chintamani, the
precious jewel, of renunciation of fruit. It will show you the way. This principle of renunciation of fruit also shows
us the bounds within which to act. When this light is near, what we should do, what we should not do, what we
should change and when, all this becomes clear of its own accord.
20. But now we shall think of something quite different. Should, or should not, the seeker keep in mind the
ultimate state when all activities cease? Should the seeker keep his eyes on the state of the jnani, the seer, who
does nothing, but through whom countless action take place? No. Here too we should apply the touchstone of
renunciation of fruit. The shaping our lives is so beautiful that our needs will be met even without our looking for
them.
The noblest fruit of life is moksha, freedom. But even for that freedom, even for that state of inactivity, we
should not be greedy. That state will come to us unawares, of its own accord. Sannyaasa is not the sort thing that
comes at five minutes past two, all of a sudden. Sannyaasa is not something mechanical. We cannot even be
conscious of the way in which it grows in our life. Therefore, give up all thought of moksha, the achievement of
freedom.
21. The bhakta, however, keeps saying to the Lord, "It is enough for me to love you. I do not want the final fruit
of moksha." After all, moksha too is a kind of enjoyment, a kind of fruit. And to this fruit again we should apply the
scissors of renunciation of fruit; but this does not mean that we shall miss moksha. The scissors will break and the
fruit grow stronger.
Even as we give up the desire for moksha, we shall be moving towards it, without being aware of it. We should be so
absorbed in sadhana that we forget all about moksha, and then moksha will come seeking us and stand in front of
us. Let the sadhaka be steeped in his sadhana.

"maa te sangaastuakarmani."
"Do not be attached to actionlessness."
In the very beginning the Lord has said, "Do not be attached to the state of actionlessness, to moksha."
Now, in the end, He says again.

"aham tvaa sarvapaapebhyo mokshayishyaami maa suchah."
"I shall deliver you from all sins, do not grieve." He says, "I am the master, the giver of moksha. Do not worry
about moksha. It is enough if you attend to your effort."
By forgetting all about moksha; one's efforts become more noble. Then moksha will be enamored to you and come
to you. Round the neck of the seeker who, without desire for moksha, is absorbed in sadhana, in effort, Moksha Lakshmi, the Goddess of Freedom, will throw the garland of victory.
22. When we reach the ultimate bounds of sadhana, fulfillment stands there, waiting for us with folded hands. If a
man who wants to reach home, stands under a tree in the forest chanting "Home, Home," - home will remain as far
away from him as ever, while he will have to remain in the forest. If I think of home and take rest by the way, I
shall stay far away from that ultimate place of rest. I should keep steadily at the job of walking.
It is only then that home will, all of a sudden, come and confront me. By lazily thinking of moksha, my effort, my
sadhana, becomes lax, and the goal recedes. Not to bother about moksha, but to remain absorbed in sadhana, is the
way to bring moksha near. Do not hanker for rest, for the state of inaction. If you love sadhana for its own sake,
moksha is sure to come.
You will not get your answer to a problem by shouting, "Answer, Answer!" It is only by following, step by step, the
appropriate method, that you will get the answer.
When the process is complete, the answer is found. How can we reach the end before the completion of the
process? How can we get the answer without the method? How can the state of realization be reached while yet
one is in the state of seeking? When one is struggling in the water, what is the use of dreaming of the pleasures
and the safety of the shore beyond? Then all one's attention should be directed, all one's energy be applied, to
pushing forward, stroke by stroke. First complete the sadhana, the process. Cross the sea. Freedom will come of
itself.
The triple state of siddha
23. When the jnani, the seer, reaches the final stage, all activities cease; they drop off. But this does not mean
that in this stage there will be no activity at all. Actions may be done through him, or they may not. This last stage
is surpassingly beautiful and noble. In that state, whatever happens, there is no thought about it.
And whatever happens is beneficent and beautiful. He now stands at the summit of sadhana. And although he does
everything now, he does nothing. Even when he kills, he does not kill. And when he does good, it is not he that does
good.
24. This final state of freedom is also the last stage of sadhana. The last stage of sadhana is reached when
sadhana becomes natural, easy. Then there is not even the thought that one is doing something. In other words, I
should call this the "a moral" stage of sadhana.
The stage of realization is not a moral stage. The little child speaks the truth, but that does not make him moral,
because he has no idea of what falsehood means. To be acquainted with falsehood and yet to speak the truth, that
is moral action. In the state of realization, there is no falsehood at all; there is only truth. Hence there is no
question of morality. There no forbidden thing can enter; the ear cannot hear what should not be heard; the eye
cannot see what should not be seen.
Only that which should be done will get done through the hand; no effort is needed. That which should be avoided
keeps itself off; there is no need to avoid it. This is the state in which there is no morality. It is in this culmination
of sadhana, call it a moral or beyond morality it is here, in this transcendence of morality that one sees the
supreme heights of morality. This phrase, 'transcendence of morality' strikes me as happy. We may also call this
state of saattvik action, which is free of sattva, is beyond goodness.
25. How is one to describe this state? Just as before an eclipse darkness fills the sky, the shadow of the moksha
which is to come at the death of the body begins to spread even before the body falls. Even while living in the

body, the experience of the state of moksha, which is to come, begins. When we try to describe this state, words
fail. However much violence a man in this state commits, he does nothing. By what measure can we measure his
actions?
All the actions which take place through him will only be sattvik. Even when all activity has been exhausted, he will
continue to confer blessing on the world. I do not know what language to use to describe this.
26. In this last state, there are three attitudes. One is that of Vamadeva. His famous declaration is, 'All that
there is in the universe, that am I.' The jnani, the seer, becomes ego-less. He loses attachment to the body, he
reaches the end of activity as such. Now he attains a new state of being. This state cannot be contained in one
body.
A state of beings is not a state of activity. It is the state in which bhaavanaa is most pervasive and intense. We
can in some measure, experience this state of being. The mother becomes guilty because of the sin of the child.
She becomes virtuous because of his virtue, sad because of his sorrow, and happy because of his happiness. This
experience of identity, in the case of the mother, is limited to her child. She looks upon child's sins as her own.
The seer too, by the power of this bhavana takes upon himself the sins of all the world.
Though he is a sinner because of the sins of the three worlds, and a saint because of the virtues of the three
world, even then, none of the sins and none of the virtues can touch him.

27. In the Rudra-Sukta, the rishi says:

"yavaascha me tilaascha me godhuumaascha me,"
"Give me jowar, give me sesame, give me wheat." How big must be the stomach of this rishi, who thus keeps
demanding everything! But he who demands all this is not the six-foot body, but his Self, assuming the form of the
entire universe.
I call this the vaidika vishvaatmabhaava,' the Vedic identity with the universe. We see in the Vedas the culmination
of this bhavana.
28. Narsi Mehta, the Gujarati saint, while singing holy songs, says, "My Lord, what sin have I committed, that I
should feel sleepy even while I praise your name?" But was it Narsi Mehta that felt sleepy? No, it was those who
listened to him.
But Narsi Mehta asked this question identifying himself with his listeners. This was the state of his being. This is
the state of all seers. In this state, it will appear to one that all the sins and all the virtuous actions of the world
take place through one. And that is what the seer would say too. Does not the rishi say, "Many things that ought
not to be done, I have done, I am doing, I shall do?" When this state of being is achieved, the soul begins to soar
like a bird leaving the earth behind.
29. The seer has a state of activity corresponding to this state of being. What would the seer do spontaneously?
Whatever he does will only be saattvik. Though he is still held within the limits of the human frame, his whole body
and all his senses have become saattvik; and so all his action can only be saattvik. From the practical point of view,
the ultimate perfection of the saattvik nature will be found in his actions.
But looked at from the point of view of identity with the universe, it will seen that, though the sins and the virtues
of the three worlds are his, he is not touched by them for he has taken off this close-fitting garment of the body
and thrown it away. It is only when we remove and cast away this transient body that the universal form comes to
us.

30. Besides a state of being and a state of action, a third state also belongs to the seer. That is the state of
awareness. In this state he does not bear with either sin or virtue. He flings everything aside. He is ready to set
fire to the whole universe. He is not prepared to take the responsibility for any action. He cannot bear even the
touch of it. In the jnani's state of freedom, when he has reached the end of sadhana, these three states become
possible.
31. How is one to attain this state of inactivity, the final state? We have to train ourselves not to take upon our
heads the responsibility for the actions we perform, the burden of doership. We should keep reflecting, "I am only
the occasion; I am not the doer of the deed." We should, with humility, take up the stand that we are not the doer
of action. But it cannot be said that with this alone all sense of doership will leave us. Little by little, this
bhaavanaa will grow.
First let us feel - "I am nothing; I am a toy in his hands, a puppet that He sets dancing." Then let us try to feel
that whatever gets done is born of the body. I have no contact with it. All these activities belong to corpse. But I
am not corpse. "I am not a shava but Shiva, not a corpse, but the Lord." Let us not get caught up in the body's
meshes.
When we have done this, we shall attain the state of the jnani and feel that we have not connection at all with the
body. Now we shall experience the three states of the final stage, as described above. First, its state of activity,
in which pure and perfect action takes place through the jnani. Secondly, the state of being in which, although he
feels that he does all the sins and all the virtuous actions in the three worlds, none of them ever touches him.
And thirdly, the state of awareness in which he does not allow the slightest action to approach him. He burns all
action to ashes. We can describe the jnani, the seer, through each of these three states.

Thou, Thou, Thou alone
32. After having said all this, the Lord tells Arjuna, "You have heard with attention all that I have been saying.
Now, Arjuna, consider fully, and do what you think right." Thus the Lord generously sets Arjuna free. This is the
greatness of the Gita. But once again the Lord feels pity. The freedom of will that He gave to Arjuna, he takes
back again.
He says, "Arjuna, give up your will, your effort; give up everything, and come and take refuge in me." Thus inducing
him to find refuge in Him, the Lord takes back the freedom of will He has just given. What this means is: Don't let
any desire of your own arise in your heart. Rest with the thought "Not my will, but His be done."
Let us of our own free will attain the experience that we do not want this freedom of will. Let us feel, "I am not.
Thou alone art. Thou are everything." The goat when alive bleats "Me ... me ... me ..." that is, "I, I, I." But when it is
dead and its guts are made into strings and mounted on the bow for carding cotton, then, as Dadu says it sings,
"tuhi, tuhi, tuhi" - "Thou, Thou, Thou alone." Now all is "Thou, Thou, Thou alone."

**********************************~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~******************************

