The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

The Bhagavad Gîtâ of Order
The Original text as close to the Sanskrit of
MahâBhârata Bhîshma Parva chapter 23-40, as possible
Translated by Anand Aadhar Prabhu
Production and copyright of this translation: Anand Aadhar Prabhu
Anand Aadhar is a former clinical psychologist who renounced the material way of finding happiness. He
gave up his private practice of doing psychotherapy with people of dubious motivation and went to India in
the late eighties to study the better and more honest approach of yoga in the different âshrama's. Thus he
found the principles of equality, brotherhood and freedom or a revolution of reform more wisely respected.
He met with several guru's and yoga-practitioners and learned from each of them before he arrived at his
own integral practice. He was first introduced into the basics of meditation by reading the books of Rudolf
Steiner and Krishnamurti and later on initiated into the secrets of yoga by Bhagavân Sri Sathya Sai Baba
who with His siddhi's [yogic perfections or miracles] definitely broke his materialistic and rationalistic
vision of reality in a way that left him no doubt as to how the universe is run. After visiting him he went to
Poona to receive initiation from Bhagavân Sri Rajneesh, the later Osho, just before that spiritual
philosopher and guru left this planet in the winter of 1990. He went to Amsterdam, London, New York and
other cities where he in temples under the guidance of the disciplic succession [paramparâ] of the BrahmâMâdhva Gaudyâ Vaishnava Samprâdaya studied the Sanskrit of mantra's, the vedic literatures and the
culture of Krishna-bhakti in the company of the pupils of Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupâda [ISKCON].
From their more traditional appraoch he adopted the title of prabhu, the usual term used in respecting
devotees, or bhakta's. The title Svâmi that he received from Osho he renounced out of respect for the
âcâryas in exchange for the address of Prabhu. Apart from a bhakta-program he received no further
initiation from them. The leading sannyâsis in the Netherlands at the time advised him to put his energy in
doing devotional service with the computer, hence this internetsite with the Bhagavad Gîtâ and the
Bhâgavatam based on the work of Swami Prabhupâda. Aadhar withdrew as an older devotee [born 1954]
within his own ashram in the east of the Netherlands to more extensively study in depth the music, the Gîtâ
and the Bhâgavatam. With local people interested there does he presently maintain a regular practice of
hatha, bhajan, fasting, feasting, translating, studying, reading, listening and contemplating in his
conclusion of Aadhar Yoga. He does no puja [idol-worship], but does regularly, to the regular of Krishna's
greater nature, listen to the Gîtâ and associate in kirtan [singing together] and reading from the
Bhâgavatam.

The original texts and word for word-translations
are of Swamî Prabhupâda and
©1989, of The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Introduction
Dear reader,
Who am I to present to you this great Song of God? I can give you my name, but this book is exactly about answering
this question properly. It is about Lord Krishna explaining to His friend Arjuna who he and He Himself really is. That
knowledge would give Arjuna the strength and the resolve to know and to defeat his enemies. The crisis of Arjuna is
that of identity: who am I, what am I to do, how am I to see things, what is my nature, what is the right attitude?
How to attain peace ànd the victory? We as readers are that Arjuna, and I as a translator/interpreter/concatenator
was in the same position. I was faced with many Bhagavad Gîtâs that I, honestly, truly all couldn't read properly.
First of all it is a heavy piece of philosophy actually, with which it is difficult to identify oneself. Second of all were
most Gîtâs available cut into an enormous heap of philosophical fragments in studies of detail, from which the original
course of reasoning became completely obscure. It was not difficult to understand what the preaching was all about,
but what did the book say itself? How could I listen to the original speaker and pick it up from the heart as one
usually does, following the reasoning in a book? In a book I normally want to listen to what the speaker has to say,
anything in the way between me and the speaker is a hindrance. Thus can all the culture of belief and interpretation
be experienced as a hindrance, or a problem of the purity of the medium between oneself and the Lord of Wisdom. I
could ask myself: Am I listening to Vyâsadeva, the writer, to Sañjaya, the reporter of this discussion Vyâsa introduces
as a speaker, or to Krishna, the one that is speaking to us actually? Am I listening to the spiritual teacher introducing
me into this knowledge, interpreting and translating it to my and his understanding and to my and his social and
personal ego-interest, to the religion of social convention keeping up the good attitude or am I just studying a medium
on itself, like a material book or a modern internetpage that depends on its own material conditions managed by a
publisher or webmaster?
Thus this presentation of the Gîtâ is an effort to reconstruct what actually was said by Lord Krishna. I kept,
translating, as close to the Sanskrit as possible trying not to add, nor to omit a single word, so that the words
Vyâsadeva, the original author, used, can be appreciated as from him. On the battlefield of Kurukshetra just before
the great war of the Mahâbhârata Krishna spoke these to Arjuna at the end of an era of vedic culture that left us with
the nature of what we now know as modern time and by Hindus is called Kali-Yuga, the Iron age of Quarrel. I have
called this Gîtâ, the Gîtâ of Order because that was what I longed for and that was what my original purpose and
belief in God was: to get everything, everyone, the world, and myself in order. So, I studied what the tradition said, I
remembered what I learned from modern science, philosophy and the spiritual teachings and last but not least I
wanted to see my own modern/postmodern experience reflected too without falling into the selfhood of ego. From
the tradition itself I learned that its approach of proper reference does not really differ from the method of modern
natural science also founded on proper reference. Sañjaya could be a pure medium for the words of Krishna, because
he was a loyal pupil of Vyâsadeva. So I too could be a pure medium if I would follow the same method. Thus this Gîtâ
does not stand on itself but is directly born from a previous version, a line of disciplic succession, the tradition; it also
originated from all the versions and the whole discussion entertained at the present time. I understood I had to cope
with the whole confusion in this field. I had to choose: there are so many Gîtâs and thus so many traditions of
learning to respect. There is the Gîtâ of S'ankarâcârya, the Gîtâ of Maharishi Yogi, the Gîtâ of S'rî Yukteswar, the Gîtâ
of the American Gîtâ Society, the Gîtâ of W.Q. Judge of Theosophy, the Gîtâ of the internet-site for it, the Gîtâ of the
Hare Krishnas and even a Gîtâ presented on television.
I concluded, remembering of what I had understood thus far, that if one is not of sacrifice, that one hasn't really
understood the purport of what the Lord tries to tell us. Therefore I could skip all Gîtâ 's that were not offered on the
internet. Gîtâ 's not shared with the world cannot be considered as to be of good will towards the world, I could
maintain as a new norm to a new medium. The knowledge of God is the property of God and not of a bookseller or
institute of learning. So all claims of proprietorship or slackness in offering were disqualified. That left me with the
only recently available Gîtâ of Theosophy, the always available Gîtâ 's of the American Gîtâ Society, a recently from
the Internet withdrawn version of the Gîtâ from Vaishnavas in India (at the end of this translation not mentioned in
the reference-links at the bottom of the page anymore), the Internet-site www.bhagavad-gita.org from another
branch of western Vaishnavas for it and the original Hare Krishna Gîtâ of Swami Prabhupâda's western ISKCON-math
school of Vaishnavism. The last two Gîtâ's became my stronghold of study as they were the only ones meeting the
scientific demand of proper reference to the original Sanskrit, word for word. From them I could, together with the
Sanskrit dictionary and a basic course in Sanskrit, reconstruct the original course of reasoning as it is offered here. As
such I am a follower of this Vaishnav' culture and a pupil (of a pupil of) the âcârya (teacher, guru, by example) that
introduced this method of respect for the tradition in our Western Culture. The other Gîtâ's so became just a second
opinion to find out what the discussions of translation in the world were really all about, while I meanwhile kept to
the siddhânta, or end conclusion of vedic study of the leading acâryâs.

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

This end conclusion was devised by S'rî Krishna-Caitanya (born 1486), a great devotee and âcârya of Lord Krishna who
was recognized as Bhagavân, an original incarnation of the Supreme Lord. His descend in the sixteenth century meant
a reform of the vedic culture that declared an end to the false authorities of religion and the caste-system. The
siddhânta was formulated as acinthya-bheda-abheda-tattva, meaning: the Lord is the inscrutable unity in diversity.
With this conclusion all differences of age and vocation were subjected to ones individual devotion to the Lord as the
binding force, as expressed in ones level of transcendence, of spiritual yogic control and stability of selfrealization
over the material conditioning, and ones mode of commitment, or experience with the culture of devotion. In other
worlds: one needs to be above the material motive and one needs a certain experience in Yoga and devotional service
before one can reliably speak of and live with the contents of e.g. this book. To be merely an expert in Sanskrit or to
be a religious authority from an institute of learning is thus not enough. One also has to realize oneself independently
relating to the Lord, what the story of God, His story, with this yoga is all about.
So what is the story about? It is taken from the epic the Mahâbhârata that is about the great war that ended the socalled Dvâpara Yuga or era of vedic culture. The Kurudynasty (see family tree) in conflict meets on the battlefield.
The main-characters speaking, Krishna and Arjuna, are nephews in a long line of vedic succession in dynasties of
nobility that ruled Bhârata-varsha, India, with the knowledge of Bhagavân, the Supreme Lord who takes different
forms in different incarnations (called avatâras) throughout history. Christian readers also should see Lord Jesus
Christ as a type of such an incarnation of the Original Personality of Godhead that is the Supreme Lord, be it that Lord
Jesus does not represent a vedic descent of the Supreme Lord, but is an incarnation to the specifics of the Jewish
culture of God. Krishna's father Vasudeva was the brother of Queen Kuntî also called aunt Prithâ often mentioned in
this Gîtâ. Arjuna, with his four brothers called the Pândavas, was born from King Pându and Queen Kuntî in the
Kurudynasty. Pându had a blind brother called Dhritarâshthra who himself had a hundred sons called the Kauravas.
Pându died young and the sons of Pându were raised by their uncle together with their nephews the Kauravas. This
family bond ran into a terrible fugue over a game of dice with which the Kauravas denied the Pândavas the right to
their piece of the common heritage. Especially seeing how well they did before the fugue gave rise to all kinds of bad
character. Because of the -prepared- game of dice they were banned for the wilderness for a thirteen years. When
after that period they were told that they hadn't perfectly performed according the rules and thus had their exile
extended, the limit was reached: never would Yudhishthhir, Arjuna, Bhîma, Nakula and Sahadeva, the Pândavas, get
their kingdom back this way. Because of this injustice they then met at Kurukshetra, a holy place of pilgrimage, for
battle. Arjuna seeing all his nephews, uncles and other family members on the battlefield collapses: he doesn't want
to fight anymore and calls for his friend and nephew Krishna, who assists him as his charioteer, for help. Then Krishna
manifests His true nature before Arjuna. He tells him that it is according to his nature as a ruler that he must fight
and then explains to him how to attain to the transcendental position of selfrealization that is needed to be in control
above the modes of material nature and all the character of man belonging to it and thus be assured of the victory.
Krishna identifies Himself as Vishnu, the Maintainer, the one of goodness and explains to Arjuna that he should see
Him as the Sun and the Moon; the order of nature, as the taste of water, the divinities and the Time itself. He also
tells him that this type of knowledge is personal and confidential. This cannot be told to people adverse to the
science of yoga of Him which Krishna explains in the underlying eighteen chapters of the Gîtâ.
The yoga of Krishna is divided in three main portions in this book: karma- bhakti- and jñânayoga. First of all there is
the karmic point of view: through proper action and analysis one realizes ones connectedness, realigning oneself
(through religion, re-ligare, realigning, called dharma or proper action) with the original person that is the Lord and
the true self as well as with the objective of the Absolute of the Truth of the manifest complete of the material
universe. This unwinding of the illusioned state achieved by abandoning profitmotivated labor or karma is attained by
detachment and meditation. Next, in the second section on Bhakti-yoga, Krishna explains what it means to attain to
the transcendental position: without developing fortitude in devotional service or bhakti-yoga one can be enlightened
- for a while, but one is not liberated, one does not attain to the stability of wisdom in good habits of respect that one
is seeking. Krishna then explains Arjuna about His personal nature and how he should recognize Himself in His
different identities. Arjuna's gates of perception are then, on his own request, broken open by Krishna who shows him
His Universal Form, the complete of His personal nature. From then on does Arjuna no longer doubt the divinity of his
friend and does he excuse himself for having treated Him as a normal mortal being in the past. In the last six chapters
on the Yoga of Spiritual knowledge or jñâna yoga explains Krishna how, with the difference between the knower and
the known, the divisions of nature in three modes lead to different kinds of sacrificing and personal duty. Explaining
the difference between the divine and the godless nature He then tells Arjuna finally how through renunciation, its
threefold nature and its service with the divisions of society, one attains to the ultimate of liberation under the
condition of respecting Him as the ultimate order and nature of the Absolute Truth of the soul.
More about the antecedents of the culture of devotion and spiritual knowledge, Krishna's life and the reality of our
modern lives, is explained in the Srîmad Bhâgavatam, also offered by me on the internet at srimadbhagavatam.org,
which can be considered the Krishna-Bible on the life and times of the Lord and His devotees, to which this sermon of
the Lord on the battlefield is the abstract or introduction.
In delight of service to the Lord and His devotees, I wish you and all of your relatives a sound progress on the spiritual
path and all the happiness and glory of selfrealization that is possible within this human life.
with all respects, Anand Aadhar Prabhu, March 2001

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Contents
Introduction

Introduction

2

Karma Yoga

The Yoga of Perfect Action

Chapter 1 - 6

The individual soul realizes itself the Original Soul through action.
Chapter 1

The Yoga of Dejection

Chapter 2
Chapter 2a
Chapter 2b
Chapter 3

The

Chapter 4

The

Chapter 5

The

Chapter 6

The

The

Bhakti Yoga

On the confrontation with the necessity to fight
Yoga of Analytic Knowledge
On the knowledge of the soul
On the results of labor
Yoga of Action
On mastering the intelligence
Yoga of Knowledge
On sacrificing
Yoga of Work in Detachment
About the reality of detachment
Yoga of Meditation
About the nature of yoga and reïncarnation

The Yoga of Devotion

5
18
29
40
53
66
75

Chapter 7 – 12

The individual soul realizes itself the Original Soul through devotion
Chapter 7

The Yoga of Wisdom

Chapter 8

The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

Chapter 9

The Yoga of Confidentiality

Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12

About knowing and realizing oneself

89

About salvation

98

On the confidential of knowledge

107

On His Identity
The Yoga of the Universal Form
On the confrontation with the complete of His reality
The Yoga of Devotion
On fixing oneself on the ultimate of perfection

117

The Yoga of His Opulence

Jňâna Yoga

The Yoga of Spiritual Knowledge

129
146

Chapter 13 – 18

The individual soul realizes itself the Original Soul through knowledge
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 18a
Chapter 18b

The Yoga of of Discrimination
On the difference between the knower and the known
The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature
On the inherent qualities of material nature
The Yoga of the Supreme Person
About the realization of the characteristics, virtue and glory of God
The Yoga of discriminating the qualities of the enlightened and the
unenlightened
About the qualities of the divine and the godless
The Yoga of the Threefold Division of Faith
About the nature of each type of food intake, austerity and sacrifice
The Yoga of liberation through Renunciation
About renunciation and its threefold nature
About renunciation (its threefold nature) and its service with the divisions of
society as the ultimate of liberation

152
162
171
178
185
194
206

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 1

The Yoga of Dejection

Time: 3102 B.C. - On the confrontation with the necessity to fight.
Text 1
Dhritarâshthra [the blind uncle of the Pândavas, the sons of king Pându] said: "At Kurukshetra, a place of
pilgrimage, my party and the sons of Pându assembled desiring to fight. What did they do, O Sañjaya?"
SANSKRIT

dhrtarâstra uvâca
dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre
samavetâh yuyutsavah
mâmakâh pândavâs caiva
kim akurvata sanjaya
WORD FOR WORD
dhrtarastrah uvaca -- King Dhrtarastra said; dharma-ksetre -- in the place of pilgrimage; kuru-ksetre -- in
the place named Kurukshetra; samavetah -- assembled; yuyutsavah -- desiring to fight; mamakah -- my
party (sons); pandavah -- the sons of Pandu; ca -- and; eva -- certainly; kim -- what; akurvata -- did they
do; sanjaya -- O Sañjaya.
TRANSLATION
Dhrtarastra said: O Sañjaya, after my sons and the sons of Pandu assembled in the place of pilgrimage at
Kurukshetra, desiring to fight, what did they do?
Text 2
Sañjaya said: "After seeing the formation of the soldiers of the Pândavas, King Duryodhana [the leader of
the sons of Dhritarâshthra, the Kurus] at that time approached his teacher [Dronâcârya] and said:
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
drstvâ tu pândavânâkam
vyâdham duryodhanas tadâ
âcâryam upasangamya
râjâ vacanam abravît
WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; drstva -- after seeing; tu -- but; pandava-anikam -- the soldiers of the
Pandavas; vyudham -- arranged in a military phalanx; duryodhanah -- King Duryodhana; tada -- at that
time; acaryam -- the teacher; upasangamya -- approaching; raja -- the king; vacanam -- words; abravit -spoke.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said: O King, after looking over the army arranged in military formation by the sons of Pandu, King
Duryodhana went to his teacher and spoke the following words.
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 1 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
“Just see the sons of Pându [a brother of Dhritarâshthra and the father of the Pândavas], o teacher,
arranged as a great military force by the son of Drupada [the father in law of Arjuna who leads the
Pândavas], your intelligent disciple [Dhristadyumna].
SANSKRIT

pasyaitâm pându-putrânâm
âcârya mahatâm camûm
vyâdhâm drupada-putrena
tava sisyena dhîmatâ

WORD FOR WORD
pasya -- behold; etam -- this; pandu-putranam -- of the sons of Pandu; acarya -- O teacher; mahatim -great; camum -- military force; vyudham -- arranged; drupada-putrena -- by the son of Drupada; tava -your; sisyena -- disciple; dhi-mata -- very intelligent.
TRANSLATION
O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly arranged by your intelligent
disciple the son of Drupada.
Text 4
“There are heroes and mighty bowmen equal in the fight to Bhîma and Arjuna [two of the five sons of
Pându] like Yuyudhâna and Virata as also Drupada himself, who is also a great warrior.
SANSKRIT

atra sûrâ mahesvâsâ
bhîmârjuna-samâ yudhi
yuyudhâno virâtas ca
drupadas ca mahâ-rathah
WORD FOR WORD
atra -- here; surah -- heroes; maha-isu-asah -- mighty bowmen; bhima-arjuna -- to Bhima and Arjuna;
samah -- equal; yudhi -- in the fight; yuyudhanah -- Yuyudhana; viratah -- Virata; ca -- also; drupadah -Drupada; ca -- also; maha-rathah -- great fighter.
TRANSLATION
Here in this army are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhima and Arjuna: great fighters like
Yuyudhana, Virata and Drupada.
Text 5
Dhrishthâketu, Cekitâna, Kâs'îrâja, and also the very powerful Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Saibya are there,
who are all great heroes in human society.
SANSKRIT

dhrstaketus cekitânah
kâsirâjas ca vîryavân
purujit kuntibhojas ca
saibyas ca nara-pungavah
WORD FOR WORD
dhrstaketuh -- Dhrishthâketu; cekitanah -- Cekitana; kasirajah -- Kasiraja; ca -- also; virya-van -- very
powerful; purujit -- Purujit; kuntibhojah -- Kuntibhoja; ca -- and; saibyah -- Saibya; ca -- and; narapungavah -- hero in human society.
TRANSLATION
There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhrishthâketu, Cekitana, Kasiraja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja
and Saibya.
Text 6
Yudhâmanyu, the mighty Uttamaujâ, the very powerful son of Subhadrâ [sister of Krishna, a wife of
Arjuna] and the sons of Draupadî all certainly are great chariot fighters.
SANSKRIT

yudhâmanyus ca vikrânta
uttamaujâs ca vîryavân
saubhadro draupadeyâs ca
sarva eva mahâ-rathâh
WORD FOR WORD
yudhamanyuh -- Yudhamanyu; ca -- and; vikrantah -- mighty; uttamaujah -- Uttamauja; ca -- and; viryavan -- very powerful; saubhadrah -- the son of Subhadra; draupadeyah -- the sons of Draupadi; ca -- and;
sarve -- all; eva -- certainly; maha-rathah -- great chariot fighters.
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 2 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
There are the mighty Yudhamanyu, the very powerful Uttamauja, the son of Subhadra and the sons of
Draupadi. All these warriors are great chariot fighters.
Text 7
But to your information, o best of the twice-born, let me tell you also about the specially powerful
captains of our soldiers.
SANSKRIT

asmâkam tu visistâ ye
tân nibodha dvijottama
nâyakâ mama sainyasya
samjnârtham tân bravîmi te
WORD FOR WORD
asmakam -- our; tu -- but; visistah -- especially powerful; ye -- who; tan -- them; nibodha -- just take note
of, be informed; dvija-uttama -- O best of the brahmanas; nayakah -- captains; mama -- my; sainyasya -of the soldiers; samjna-artham -- for information; tan -- them; bravimi -- I am speaking; te -- to you.
TRANSLATION
But for your information, O best of the brahmanas, let me tell you about the captains who are especially
qualified to lead my military force.
Text 8
Of your good self there are grandfather Bhîshma and also Karna, Kripa, and As'vatthâmâ, Vikarna and the
son of Somadatta [Bhuris'ravâ], who are certainly also always victorious in battle.
SANSKRIT

bhavân bhîsmas ca karnas ca
krpas ca samitim-jayah
asvatthâma vikarnas ca
saumadattis tathaiva ca
WORD FOR WORD
bhavan -- your good self; bhismah -- Grandfather Bhîshma; ca -- also; karnah -- Karna; ca -- and; krpah -Krpa; ca -- and; samitim-jayah -- always victorious in battle; as'vatthama -- as'vatthama; vikarnah -Vikarna; ca -- as well as; saumadattih -- the son of Somadatta; tatha -- as well as; eva -- certainly; ca -also.
TRANSLATION
There are personalities like you, Bhîshma, Karna, Krpa, as'vatthama, Vikarna and the son of Somadatta
called Bhurisrava, who are always victorious in battle.
Text 9
There are as well a great number of other heroes equipped with many weapons having combat
experience, that are willing to risk their lives for my sake.
SANSKRIT

anye ca bahavah sûrâ
mad-arthe tyakta-jîvitâh
nânâ-sastra-praharanâh
sarve yuddha-visâradâh

WORD FOR WORD
anye -- others; ca -- also; bahavah -- in great numbers; surah -- heroes; mat-arthe -- for my sake; tyaktajivitah -- prepared to risk life; nana -- many; sastra -- weapons; praharanah -- equipped with; sarve -- all
of them; yuddha-visaradah -- experienced in military science.
TRANSLATION
There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives for my sake. All of them are well
equipped with different kinds of weapons, and all are experienced in military science.
Text 10
Our strength is immeasurable being perfectly protected by Grandfather Bhîshma, but limited is all of this
strength with the Pândavas carefully protected by Bhîma.
SANSKRIT

aparyâptam tad asmâkam
balam bhîsmâbhiraksitam
paryâptam tv idam etesâm
balam bhîmâbhiraksitam
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 3 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
aparyaptam -- immeasurable; tat -- that; asmakam -- of ours; balam -- strength; bhisma -- by Grandfather
Bhîshma; abhiraksitam -- perfectly protected; paryaptam -- limited; tu -- but; idam -- all this; etesam -- of
the Pandavas; balam -- strength; bhima -- by Bhima; abhiraksitam -- carefully protected.
TRANSLATION
Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather Bhîshma, whereas the
strength of the Pandavas, carefully protected by Bhima, is limited.
Text 11
Those everywhere strategically arranged to support Bhîshma should certainly all respectively give you
their support."
SANSKRIT

ayanesu ca sarvesu
yathâ-bhâgam avasthitâh
bhîsmam evâbhiraksantu
bhavantah sarva eva hi
WORD FOR WORD
ayanesu -- in the strategic points; ca -- also; sarvesu -- everywhere; yatha-bhagam -- as differently
arranged; avasthitah -- situated; bhismam -- unto Grandfather Bhîshma; eva -- certainly; abhiraksantu -should give support; bhavantah -- you; sarve -- all respectively; eva hi -- certainly.
TRANSLATION
All of you must now give full support to Grandfather Bhîshma, as you stand at your respective strategic
points of entrance into the phalanx of the army.
Text 12
To his greater joy, did the valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the grandfather, blew his conchshell very
loudly vibrating like a roaring lion.
SANSKRIT

tasya sanjanayan harsam
kuru-vrddhah pitâmahah
simha-nâdam vinadyoccaih
sankham dadhmau pratâpavân

WORD FOR WORD
tasya -- his; sanjanayan -- increasing; harsam -- cheerfulness; kuru-vrddhah -- the grandsire of the Kuru
dynasty (Bhîshma); pitamahah -- the grandfather; simha-nadam -- roaring sound, like that of a lion;
vinadya -- vibrating; uccaih -- very loudly; sankham -- conchshell; dadhmau -- blew; pratapa-van -- the
valiant.
TRANSLATION
Then Bhîshma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the grandfather of the fighters, blew his
conchshell very loudly, making a sound like the roar of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.
Text 13
Other conchshells as also large and small drums and horns all of a sudden were sounded together
thereafter , which combined into a tumultuous uproar.
SANSKRIT

tatah sankhâs ca bheryas ca
panavânaka-gomukhâh
sahasaivâbhyahanyanta
sa sabdas tumulo 'bhavat

WORD FOR WORD
tatah -- thereafter; sankhah -- conchshells; ca -- also; bheryah -- large drums; ca -- and; panava-anaka -small drums and kettledrums; gomukhah -- horns; sahasa -- all of a sudden; eva -- certainly;
abhyahanyanta -- were simultaneously sounded; sah -- that; sabdah -- combined sound; tumulah -tumultuous; abhavat -- became.
TRANSLATION
After that, the conchshells, drums, bugles, trumpets and horns were all suddenly sounded, and the
combined sound was tumultuous.

Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 4 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
Text 14
Thereupon Mâdhava [Krishna as the husband of
the goddess of fortune] with Arjuna standing in a
great chariot drawn by white horses, both selfconfident sounded their divine conchshells.
SANSKRIT

tatah svetair hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitau
mâdhavah pândavas caiva
divyau sankhau pradadhmatuh

WORD FOR WORD
tatah -- thereafter; svetaih -- with white; hayaih
-- horses; yukte -- being yoked; mahati -- in a
great; syandane -- chariot; sthitau -- situated;
madhavah -- Krishna (the husband of the
goddess of fortune); pandavah -- Arjuna (the son
of Pandu); ca -- also; eva -- certainly; divyau -transcendental;
sankhau
-conchshells;
pradadhmatuh -- sounded.
TRANSLATION
On the other side, both Lord Krishna and Arjuna,
stationed on a great chariot drawn by white
horses,
sounded
their
transcendental
conchshells.
Text 15
Hrishîkes'a [Krishna as the Lord of the Senses]
blew the Pâñcajanya, Arjuna the Devadatta and
the herculean Bhima, the voracious eater, blew
the Paundra.
SANSKRIT

pâncajanyam hrsîkeso
devadattam dhananjayah
paundram dadhmau mahâ-sankham
bhîma-karmâ vrkodarah

WORD FOR WORD
pancajanyam -- the conchshell named Pâñcajanya; hrsika-isah -- Hrisîkes'a (Krishna, the Lord who directs
the senses of the devotees); devadattam -- the conchshell named Devadatta; dhanam-jayah -- Dhanañjaya
(Arjuna, the winner of wealth); paundram -- the conch named Paundra; dadhmau -- blew; maha-sankham - the terrific conchshell; bhima-karma -- one who performs herculean tasks; vrka-udarah -- the voracious
eater (Bhima).
TRANSLATION
Lord Krishna blew His conchshell, called Pâñcajanya; Arjuna blew his, the Devadatta; and Bhima, the
voracious eater and performer of herculean tasks, blew his terrific conchshell, called Paundra.
Text 16-17-18
The king, the son of Kuntî [Yudhishthhira, the eldest Pândava] blew Ananta-vijaya while Nakula and
Sahadeva [the twin brother Pândava's] blew the Sughosha and Manipushpaka. So also the king of Kâs'î
[Varanasi], the great archerer Sikhandî and the great warrior Dhristadyumna , Virâtha [who gave the
Pândavas shelter] , Sâtyaki [Yuyudhâna, the charioteer of Krishna] who was never defeated and, o king,
Drupada together with all the sons of the Pândavas, and the mighty armed Abhimanyu [son of Subhadrâ],
each blew their respective conchshells.
SANSKRIT

anantavijayam râjâ
kuntî-putro yudhisthirah
nakulah sahadevas ca
sughosa-manipuspakau

kâsyas ca paramesvâsah
sikhandî ca mahâ-rathah
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 5 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

dhrstadyumno virâtas ca
sâtyakis câparâjitah
drupado draupadeyâs ca
sarvasah prthivî-pate
saubhadras ca mahâ-bâhuh
sankhân dadhmuh prthak prthak

WORD FOR WORD
ananta-vijayam -- the conch named Ananta-vijaya; raja -- the king; kunti-putrah -- the son of Kunti;
yudhisthirah -- Yudhishthhira; nakulah -- Nakula; sahadevah -- Sahadeva; ca -- and; sughosa-manipuspakau -- the conches named Sughosha and Manipushpaka;
kasyah -- the King of Kasi (Varanasi); ca -- and; parama-isu-asah -- the great archer; sikhandi -- Sikhandi;
ca -- also; maha-rathah -- one who can fight alone against thousands; dhrstadyumnah -- Dhrstadyumna
(the son of King Drupada); viratah -- Virata (the prince who gave shelter to the Pandavas while they were
in disguise); ca -- also; satyakih -- Satyaki (the same as Yuyudhana, the charioteer of Lord Krishna); ca -and; aparajitah -- who had never been vanquished;
drupadah -- Drupada, the King of Pancala; draupadeyah -- the sons of Draupadi; ca -- also; sarvasah -- all;
prthivi-pate -- O King; saubhadrah -- Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra; ca -- also; maha-bahuh -- mightyarmed; sankhan -- conchshells; dadhmuh -- blew; prthak prthak -- each separately.
TRANSLATION
King Yudhishthhira, the son of Kunti, blew his conchshell, the Ananta-vijaya, and Nakula and Sahadeva
blew the Sughosha and Manipushpaka. That great archer the King of Kasi, the great fighter Sikhandi,
Dhrstadyumna, Virata, the unconquerable Satyaki, Drupada, the sons of Draupadi, and the others, O King,
such as the mighty-armed son of Subhadra, all blew their respective conchshells.
Text 19
That vibration tore the hearts of the sons of Dhritarâshthra as it resounded tumultuous in the sky and the
earth.
SANSKRIT

sa ghoso dhârtarâstrânâm
hrdayâni vyadârayat
nabhas ca prthivîm caiva
tumulo 'bhyanunâdayan

WORD FOR WORD
sah -- that; ghosah -- vibration; dhartarastranam -- of the sons of Dhrtarastra; hrdayani -- hearts;
vyadarayat -- shattered; nabhah -- the sky; ca -- also; prthivim -- the surface of the earth; ca -- also; eva - certainly; tumulah -- uproarious; abhyanunadayan -- resounding.
TRANSLATION
The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious. Vibrating both in the sky and on the earth,
it shattered the hearts of the sons of Dhrtarastra.
Text 20
Then the son of Pându, whose flag was marked with Hanumân and who was looking from his chariot upon
the sons of Dhritarâshthra in preparing to take up his bow and shoot his arrows, O King, at that time spoke
the following words to Hrishîkes'a [Krishna as the Lord of the senses].
SANSKRIT

atha vyavasthitân drstvâ
dhârtarâstrân kapi-dhvajah
pravrtte sastra-sampâte
dhanur udyamya pândavah
hrsîkesam tadâ vâkyam
idam âha mahî-pate

WORD FOR WORD
atha -- thereupon; vyavasthitan -- situated; drstva -- looking upon; dhartarastran -- the sons of
Dhrtarastra; kapi-dhvajah -- he whose flag was marked with Hanuman; pravrtte -- while about to engage;
sastra-sampate -- in releasing his arrows; dhanuh -- bow; udyamya -- taking up; pandavah -- the son of
Pandu (Arjuna); hrsikesam -- unto Lord Krishna; tada -- at that time; vakyam -- words; idam -- these; aha - said; mahi-pate -- O King.
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 6 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
At that time Arjuna, the son of Pandu, seated in the chariot bearing the flag marked with Hanuman, took
up his bow and prepared to shoot his arrows. O King, after looking at the sons of Dhrtarastra drawn in
military array, Arjuna then spoke to Lord Krishna these words.
Text 21-22
Arjuna said: 'Please drive my chariot between both the armies, O infallible one, for the time that I may
look upon those desiring to fight arrayed on the battlefield with whom together I have to contend in this
trial of arms.
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
senayor ubhayor madhye
ratham sthâpaya me 'cyuta
yâvad etân nirâkse 'ham
yod dhu-kâmân avasthitân
kair mayâ saha yoddhavyam
asmin rana-samudyame
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; senayoh -- of the armies; ubhayoh -- both; madhye -- between; ratham -- the
chariot; sthapaya -- please keep; me -- my; acyuta -- O infallible one; yavat -- as long as; etan -- all these;
nirikse -- may look upon; aham -- I; yoddhu-kaman -- desiring to fight; avasthitan -- arrayed on the
battlefield; kaih -- with whom; maya -- by me; saha -- together; yoddhavyam -- have to fight; asmin -- in
this; rana -- strife; samudyame -- in the attempt.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies so that I may see those
present here, who desire to fight, and with whom I must contend in this great trial of arms.
Text 23
Let me see those who will be fighting and are assembled here wishing to please the evil minded son of
Dhritarâshthra.'
SANSKRIT

yotsyamânân avekse 'ham
ya ete 'tra samâgatah
dhârtarâstrasya durbuddher
yuddhe priya-cikârsavah
WORD FOR WORD
yotsyamanan -- those who will be fighting; avekse -- let me see; aham -- I; ye -- who; ete -- those; atra -here; samagatah -- assembled; dhartarastrasya -- for the son of Dhrtarastra; durbuddheh -- evil-minded;
yuddhe -- in the fight; priya -- well; cikirsavah -- wishing.
TRANSLATION
Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the evil-minded son of Dhrtarastra.
Text 24
Sañjaya said: " O son of Bharata, thus being addressed by Arjuna, did Hrishîkes'a place the mighty fine
chariot in the midst of the two armies.
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
evam ukto hrsîkeso
gudâkesena bhârata
senayor ubhayor madhye
sthâpayitvâ rathottamam
WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; evam -- thus; uktah -- addressed; hrsikesah -- Lord Krishna; gudakesena -by Arjuna; bharata -- O descendant of Bharata; senayoh -- of the armies; ubhayoh -- both; madhye -- in
the midst; sthapayitva -- placing; ratha-uttamam -- the finest chariot.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, having thus been addressed by Arjuna, Lord Krishna drew up the
fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both parties.
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 7 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 25
In front of Bhîshma, Drona and all the military leaders of the world the Lord said: ' O son of Prithâ, just
see how all the members of the Kuru-dynasty are assembled here '.
SANSKRIT

bhîsma-drona-pramukhatah
sarvesâm ca mahîksitâm
uvâca pârtha pasyaitân
samavetân kurûn iti
WORD FOR WORD
bhisma -- Grandfather Bhîshma; drona -- the teacher Drona; pramukhatah -- in front of; sarvesam -- all; ca
-- also; mahi-ksitam -- chiefs of the world; uvaca -- said; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; pasya -- just behold;
etan -- all of them; samavetan -- assembled; kurun -- the members of the Kuru dynasty; iti -- thus.
TRANSLATION
In the presence of Bhîshma, Drona and all the other chieftains of the world, the Lord said, Just behold,
Prithâ, all the Kurus assembled here.
Text 26
There he indeed could see standing both parties of the armies: his fathers, grandfathers, teachers,
maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, friends and also his fathers-in-law and well-wishers.
SANSKRIT

tatrâpasyat sthitân pârthah
pitrn atha pitâmahân
âcâryân mâtulân bhrâtrn
putrân pautrân sakhîms tathâ
svasurân suhrdas caiva
nayor ubhayor api
WORD FOR WORD
tatra -- there; apasyat -- he could see; sthitan -- standing; Prithâh -- Arjuna; pitrn -- fathers; atha -- also;
pitamahan -- grandfathers; acaryan -- teachers; matulan -- maternal uncles; bhratrn -- brothers; putran -sons; pautran -- grandsons; sakhin -- friends; tatha -- too; svasuran -- fathers-in-law; suhrdah -- wellwishers; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; senayoh -- of the armies; ubhayoh -- of both parties; api -- including.
TRANSLATION
There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his fathers, grandfathers,
teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, friends, and also his fathers-in-law and wellwishers.
Text 27
Seeing all kinds of relatives he, the son of Kunti got overwhelmed by a high degree of compassion and
lamenting he thus spoke.
SANSKRIT

tân samîksya sa kaunteyah
sarvân bandhûn avasthitân
krpayâ parayâvisto
visîdann idam abravît

WORD FOR WORD
tan -- all of them; samiksya -- after seeing; sah -- he; kaunteyah -- the son of Kunti; sarvan -- all kinds of;
bandhun -- relatives; avasthitan -- situated; krpaya -- by compassion; paraya -- of a high grade; avistah -overwhelmed; visidan -- while lamenting; idam -- thus; abravit -- spoke.
TRANSLATION
When the son of Kunti, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and relatives, he became
overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus.
Text 28
Arjuna said: 'The look of all these kinsmen, O Krishna, all present in a fighting spirit, makes the limbs of
my body quiver and my mouth dry up.
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
drstvemam sva-janam krsna
yuyutsum samupasthitam
sîdanti mama gâtrâni
mukham ca parisusyati
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 8 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; drstva -- after seeing; imam -- all these; sva janam -- kinsmen; krsna -- O
Krishna; yuyutsum -- all in a fighting spirit; samupasthitam -- present; sidanti -- are quivering; mama -my; gatrani -- limbs of the body; mukham -- mouth; ca -- also; parisusyati -- is drying up.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Krishna, seeing my friends and relatives present before me in such a fighting spirit, I
feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth drying up.
Text 29
My body trembles and my hair stands on end, my Gândiva [his bow] is slipping from my hand and my skin
certainly is burning.
SANSKRIT

vepathus ca sarîre me
roma-harsas ca jâyate
gândîvam sramsate hastât
tvak caiva paridahyate
WORD FOR WORD
vepathuh -- trembling of the body; ca -- also; sarire -- on the body; me -- my; roma-harsah -- standing of
hair on end; ca -- also; jayate -- is taking place; gandivam -- the bow of Arjuna; sramsate -- is slipping;
hastat -- from the hand; tvak -- skin; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; paridahyate -- is burning.
TRANSLATION
My whole body is trembling, my hair is standing on end, my bow Gandiva is slipping from my hand, and my
skin is burning.
Text 30
Nor am I able to keep standing, my mind goes and I see just the opposite, O Kes'ava [Krishna as the killer
of the the mad horse Kes'î].
SANSKRIT

na ca saknomy avasthâtum
bhramatîva ca me manah
nimittâni ca pasyâmi
viparîtâni kesava

WORD FOR WORD
na -- nor; ca -- also; saknomi -- am I able; avasthatum -- to stay; bhramati -- forgetting; iva -- as; ca -and; me -- my; manah -- mind; nimittani -- causes; ca -- also; pasyami -- I see; viparitani -- just the
opposite; kesava -- O killer of the demon Kes'î (Krishna).
TRANSLATION
I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and my mind is reeling. I see only
causes of misfortune, O Krishna, killer of the Kes'î demon.
Text 31
Nor do I forsee any good in killing my own kinsmen in the fight, and I do not desire the victory either, O
Krishna, nor do I expect a happy kingdom thereof.
SANSKRIT

na ca sreyo 'nupasyâmi
hatvâ sva-janam âhave
na kânkse vijayam krsna
na ca râjyam sukhâni ca

WORD FOR WORD
na -- nor; ca -- also; sreyah -- good; anupasyami -- do I foresee; hatva -- by killing; sva-janam -- own
kinsmen; ahave -- in the fight; na -- nor; kankse -- do I desire; vijayam -- victory; krsna -- O Krishna; na -nor; ca -- also; rajyam -- kingdom; sukhani -- happiness thereof; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this battle, nor can I, my dear
Krishna, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom, or happiness.
Text 32-35
What use is the kingdom to us, Govinda? What joy or life is there either if the kingdom is desired by us for
the sake of those who want that material pleasure and happiness also, while they have all taken positions
on the battlefield and are willing to give up their lives: our teachers, fathers, sons as well as certainly also
our grandfathers. All these maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers and other relatives I
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 9 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
never wish to kill nor get killed, o Madhusûdana [Krishna who defeated Madhu]. Not even in exchange for
the three worlds I want the kingdom not to speak about having it for the sake of the earth - what pleasure
will there be in killing the sons of Dhritarâshthra, O Janârdana [Krishna as maintainer of the three worlds]?
SANSKRIT

kim no râjyena govinda
kim bhogair jîvitena va
yesâm arthe kânksitam no
râjyam bhogâh sukhâni ca
ta ime 'vasthitâ yuddhe
prânâms tyaktvâ dhanâni ca
âcâryâh pitarah putrâs
tathaiva ca pitâmahâh
mâtulâh svasurâh pautrâh
syâlâh sambandhinas tathâ
etân na hantum icchâmi
ghnato 'pi madhusûdana
api trailokya-râjyasya
hetoh kim nu mahî-krte
nihatya dhârtarâstrân nah
kâ prîtih syâj janârdana
WORD FOR WORD
kim -- what use; nah -- to us; rajyena -- is the kingdom; govinda -- O Krishna; kim -- what; bhogaih -enjoyment; jivitena -- living; va -- either; yesam -- of whom; arthe -- for the sake; kanksitam -- is desired;
nah -- by us; rajyam -- kingdom; bhogah -- material enjoyment; sukhani -- all happiness; ca -- also;
te -- all of them; ime -- these; avasthitah -- situated; yuddhe -- on this battlefield; pranan -- lives; tyaktva
-- giving up; dhanani -- riches; ca -- also; acaryah -- teachers; pitarah -- fathers; putrah -- sons; tatha -- as
well as; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; pitamahah -- grandfathers;
matulah -- maternal uncles; svasurah -- fathers-in-law; pautrah -- grandsons; syalah -- brothers-in-law;
sambandhinah -- relatives; tatha -- as well as; etan -- all these; na -- never; hantum -- to kill; icchami -do I wish; ghnatah -- being killed; api -- even; madhusudana -- O killer of the demon Madhu (Krishna);
api -- even if; trai-lokya -- of the three worlds; rajyasya -- for the kingdom; hetoh -- in exchange; kim nu - what to speak of; mahi-krte -- for the sake of the earth; nihatya -- by killing; dhartarastran -- the sons of
Dhrtarastra; nah -- our; ka -- what; pritih -- pleasure; syat -- will there be; Janârdana -- O maintainer of
all living entities.
TRANSLATION
O Govinda, of what avail to us are a kingdom, happiness or even life itself when all those for whom we
may desire them are now arrayed on this battlefield? O Madhusudana, when teachers, fathers, sons,
grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other relatives are ready to
give up their lives and properties and are standing before me, why should I wish to kill them, even though
they might otherwise kill me? O maintainer of all living entities, I am not prepared to fight with them even
in exchange for the three worlds, let alone this earth. What pleasure will we derive from killing the sons
of Dhrtarastra?
Text 36
For sure sin will come upon us by killing all these aggressors and therefore we should never kill the sons of
Dhritarâshthra along with the friends and kinsmen as the question is certainly: how will we become happy
by killing, o Mâdhava?
SANSKRIT

pâpam evâsrayed asmân
hatvaitân âtatâyinah
tasmân nârhâ vayam hantum
dhârtarâstrân svabândhavân
sva-janam hi katham hatvâ
khinah syâma mâdhava

WORD FOR WORD
papam -- vices; eva -- certainly; asrayet -- must come upon; asman -- us; hatva -- by killing; etan -- all
these; atatayinah -- aggressors; tasmat -- therefore; na -- never; arhah -- deserving; vayam -- we; hantum
-- to kill; dhartarastran -- the sons of Dhrtarastra; sa-bandhavan -- along with friends; sva-janam -Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 10 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
kinsmen; hi -- certainly; katham -- how; hatva -- by killing; sukhinah -- happy; syama -- will we become;
madhava -- O Krishna, husband of the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for us to kill the sons of
Dhrtarastra and our friends. What should we gain, O Krishna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how
could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?
Text 37-38
Even if they do not see with their hearts overpowered by greed the fault to kill one's family quarreling
with friends and suffer the reactions, why should we, who see the crime of destroying a dynasty, not turn
us away from such sins, o Janârdana?
SANSKRIT

yady apy ete na pasyanti
lobhopahata-cetasah
kula-ksaya-krtam dosam
mitra-drohe ca pâtakam
katham na jneyam asmâbhih
pâpâd asmân nivartitum
kula-ksaya-krtam dosam
prapasyadbhir janârdana
WORD FOR WORD
yadi -- if; api -- even; ete -- they; na -- do not; pasyanti -- see; lobha -- by greed; upahata -overpowered; cetasah -- their hearts; kula-ksaya -- in killing the family; krtam -- done; dosam -- fault;
mitra-drohe -- in quarreling with friends; ca -- also; patakam -- sinful reactions;
katham -- why; na -- should not; jneyam -- be known; asmabhih -- by us; papat -- from sins; asmat -these; nivartitum -- to cease; kula-ksaya -- in the destruction of a dynasty; krtam -- done; dosam -- crime;
prapasyadbhih -- by those who can see; Janârdana -- O Krishna.
TRANSLATION
O Janârdana, although these men, their hearts overtaken by greed, see no fault in killing one's family or
quarreling with friends, why should we, who can see the crime in destroying a family, engage in these acts
of sin?
Text 39
Destroying the family, its eternal traditions of religion will vanish as a consequence of which the whole
family will lose its sense of duty, it is said.
SANSKRIT

kula-ksaye pranasyanti
kula-dharmâh sanâtanâh
dharme naste kulam krtsnam
adharmo 'bhibhavaty uta

WORD FOR WORD
kula-ksaye -- in destroying the family; pranasyanti -- become vanquished; kula-dharmah -- the family
traditions; sanatanah -- eternal; dharme -- religion; naste -- being destroyed; kulam -- family; krtsnam -whole; adharmah -- irreligion; abhibhavati -- transforms; uta -- it is said.
TRANSLATION
With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is vanquished, and thus the rest of the family
becomes involved in irreligion.
Text 40
With the prominence of this lack of responsibility, O Krishna, the women of the family will become spoiled
and from that corruption of womanhood there will be a confusion of identity in society.
SANSKRIT

adharmâbhibhavât krsna
pradusyanti kula-striyah
strîsu dustâsu vârsneya
jâyate varna-sankarah

WORD FOR WORD
adharma -- irreligion; abhibhavat -- having become predominant; krsna -- O Krishna; pradusyanti -become polluted; kula-striyah -- family ladies; strisu -- by the womanhood; dustasu -- being so polluted;
varsneya -- O descendant of Vrsni; jayate -- comes into being; varna-sankarah -- unwanted progeny.
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 11 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
When irreligion is prominent in the family, O Krishna, the women of the family become polluted, and from
the degradation of womanhood, O descendant of Vrsni, comes unwanted progeny.
Text 41
Such a confusion will certainly turn the life of the family members of those who killed their family to hell,
as from the fall of their forefathers they also will have stopped with the offerings of food and water.
SANSKRIT

sankaro narakâyaiva
kula-ghnânâm kulasya ca
patanti pitaro hy esâm
lupta-pindodaka-kriyâh
WORD FOR WORD
sankarah -- such unwanted children; narakaya -- make for hellish life; eva -- certainly; kula-ghnanam -- for
those who are killers of the family; kulasya -- for the family; ca -- also; patanti -- fall down; pitarah -forefathers; hi -- certainly; esam -- of them; lupta -- stopped; pinda -- of offerings of food; udaka -- and
water; kriyah -- performances.
TRANSLATION
An increase of unwanted population certainly causes hellish life both for the family and for those who
destroy the family tradition. The ancestors of such corrupt families fall down, because the performances
for offering them food and water are entirely stopped.
Text 42
Such faults of all those who destroyed the family and became confused in their identity, will devastate
the continuation of the righteousness of status orientations and family traditions in society.
SANSKRIT

dosair etaih kula-ghnânâm
varna-sankara-kârakaih
utsâdyante jâti-dharmâh
kula-dharmâs ca sâsvatâh

WORD FOR WORD
dosaih -- by such faults; etaih -- all these; kula-ghnanam -- of the destroyers of the family; varna-sankara - of unwanted children; karakaih -- which are causes; utsadyante -- are devastated; jati dharmah -community projects; kula-dharmah -- family traditions; ca -- also; sasvatah -- eternal.
TRANSLATION
By the evil deeds of those who destroy the family tradition and thus give rise to unwanted children, all
kinds of community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.
Text 43
Of those men who spoiled the family traditions, o Janârdana, one will always turn out to reside in hell,
thus I heard from the learned.
SANSKRIT

utsanna-kula-dharmânâm
manusyânâm janârdana
narake niyatam vâso
bhavatîty anususruma

WORD FOR WORD
utsanna -- spoiled; kula-dharmanam -- of those who have the family traditions; manusyanam -- of such
men; Janârdana -- O Krishna; narake -- in hell; niyatam -- always; vasah -- residence; bhavati -- it so
becomes; iti -- thus; anususruma -- I have heard by disciplic succession.
TRANSLATION
Krishna, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession that those who destroy family
traditions dwell always in hell.
Text 44
Alas, oddly we have decided to perform great sins in trying to kill kinsmen in our being driven by greed for
royal happiness.
SANSKRIT

aho bata mahat pâpam
kartum vyavasitâ vayam
Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 12 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

yad râjya-sukha-lobhena
hantum sva-janam udyatâh
WORD FOR WORD
aho -- alas; bata -- how strange it is; mahat -- great; papam -- sins; kartum -- to perform; vyavasitah -have decided; vayam -- we; yat -- because; rajya-sukha-lobhena -- driven by greed for royal happiness;
hantum -- to kill; sva-janam -- kinsmen; udyatah -- trying.
TRANSLATION
Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts. Driven by the desire to enjoy
royal happiness, we are intent on killing our own kinsmen.
Text 45
It would rather be better for me to give up my resistance and arms and have me killed by the weapons in
the hands of the sons of Dhritarâshthra on the battlefield.
SANSKRIT

yadi mâm apratîkâram
asastram sastra-pânayah
dhârtarâstrâ rane hanyus
tan me ksemataram bhavet

WORD FOR WORD
yadi - even if; mam - me; apratikaram - without being resistant; asastram -- without being fully equipped;
sastra-panayah -- those with weapons in hand; dhartarastrah -- the sons of Dhrtarastra; rane -- on the
battlefield; hanyuh -- may kill; tat -- that; me -- for me; ksema-taram -- better; bhavet -- would be.
TRANSLATION
Better for me if the sons of Dhrtarastra, weapons in hand, were to kill me unarmed and unresisting on the
battlefield.
Text 46
Sañjaya said: “Thus having spoken on the battlefield, Arjuna sat down on the seat of his chariot putting
aside his bow and arrows, in distress with a mind full of lamentation.”
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
evam uktvârjunah sankhye
rathopastha upâvisat
visrjya sa-saram câpam
soka-samvigna-mânasah

WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; evam -- thus; uktva -- saying; arjunah -- Arjuna; sankhye -- in the
battlefield; ratha -- of the chariot; upasthe -- on the seat; upavisat -- sat down again; visrjya -- putting
aside; sa-saram -- along with arrows; capam -- the bow; soka -- by lamentation; samvigna -- distressed;
manasah -- within the mind.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his bow and arrows and sat down
on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief.

Chapter 1 - The Yoga of Dejection

…Page 13 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 2
2a. On the knowledge of the soul

The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

Text 1
Sañjaya said: "Unto him [Arjuna], who was thus overwhelmed by compassion, having his eyes full of tears
and lamenting, Madhusûdana [Krishna as the killer of Madhu] spoke the following words:
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
tam tathâ krpayâvistam
asru-pûrnâkuleksanam
visîdantam idam vâkyam
uvâca madhusûdanah

WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; tam -- unto Arjuna; tatha -- thus; krpaya -- by compassion; avistam -overwhelmed; asru-purna-akula --full of tears; iksanam -- eyes; visidantam -- lamenting; idam -- these;
vakyam -- words; uvaca -- said; madhu-sudanah -- the killer of Madhu.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion, his mind depressed, his eyes full of tears, Madhusudana,
Krishna, spoke the following words.
Text 2
The Supreme Lord said: 'Wherefrom came this impurity of lamentation at this hour of crisis? This practice
of the uncivilized that does not lead to a better world, is the cause of infamy, o Arjuna.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
kutas tvâ kasmalam idam
visame samupasthitam
anârya-justam asvargyam
akîrti-karam arjuna
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kutah --wherefrom; tva -- unto you;
kasmalam -- dirtiness; idam -- this lamentation; visame -- in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam --arrived;
anarya -- persons who do not know the value of life; justam --practiced by; asvargyam -- which does not
lead to higher planets;akirti -- infamy; karam -- the cause of; arjuna -- O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, how have these impurities come upon you?
They are not at all befitting a man who knows the value of life. They lead not to higher planets but to
infamy.
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 1 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
Do not take to this impotence, o son of Prithâ, this pettiness and weakness of the heart never befitts yougive it up and stand up, o chastiser of the enemy!'
SANSKRIT

klaibyam mâ sma gamah pârtha
naitat tvayy upapadyate
ksudram hrdaya-daurbalyam
tyaktvottistha parantapa
WORD FOR WORD
klaibyam -- impotence; ma sma -- do not; gamah -- take to; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; na -- never; etat -this; tvayi -- unto you; upadyate -- is befitting; ksudram -- petty; hrdaya -- of the heart; daurbalyam -weakness; tyaktva -- giving up; uttistha -- get up; param-tapa -- O chastiser of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become you. Give up such petty
weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy.
Text 4
Arjuna said:'How can I counterattack Bhîshma and Drona with arrows in the fight, o Madhusûdana - they
are worthy of worship. O killer of the enemies!
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
katham bhîsmam aham sankhye
dronam ca madhusûdana
isubhih pratiyotsyâmi
pûjârhâv arisûdana

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; katham -- how; bhismam -- Bhîshma; aham -- I; sankhye -- in the fight;
dronam -- Drona; ca -- also; madhu-sudana -- O killer of Madhu; isubhih -- with arrows; pratiyotsyami -shall counterattack; puja-arhau -- those who are worshipable; ari-sudana -- O killer of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O killer of enemies, O killer of Madhu, how can I counterattack with arrows in battle men like
Bhîshma and Drona, who are worthy of my worship?
Text 5
Even begging in this life on the planet is certainly better than to kill those superior great souls, even
though those teachers desire worldly gain - surely our enjoying the pleasures of life will be tainted with
blood!
SANSKRIT

gurûn ahatvâ hi mahânubhâvân
sreyo bhoktum bhaiksyam apîha loke
hatvârtha-kâmâms tu gurûn ihaiva
bhunjîya bhogân rudhira-pradigdhân

WORD FOR WORD
gurun -- the superiors; ahatva -- not killing; hi -- certainly; maha-anubhavan -- great souls; sreyah -- it is
better; bhoktum -- to enjoy life; bhaiksyam -- by begging; api -- even; iha -- in this life; loke -- in this
world; hatva -- killing; artha -- gain; kaman -- desiring; tu -- but; gurun -- superiors; iha -- in this world;
eva -- certainly; bhunjiya -- one has to enjoy; bhogan -- enjoyable things; rudhira -- blood; pradigdhan -tainted with.
TRANSLATION
It would be better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of the lives of great souls who
are my teachers. Even though desiring worldly gain, they are superiors. If they are killed, everything we
enjoy will be tainted with blood.
Text 6
Nor do we know which would be better for us: that we may conquer them or they may conquer us certainly of those who do so by killing we would never want to live, all of us as we are positioned in front
of the sons of Dritharâstra.
SANSKRIT

na caitad vidmah kataran no garîyo
yad vâ jayema yadi vâ no jayeyuh

Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 2 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

yân eva hatvâ na jijîvisâmas
te 'vasthitâh pramukhe dhârtarâstrâh
WORD FOR WORD
na -- nor; ca -- also; etat -- this; vidmah -- do we know; katarat --which; nah -- for us; gariyah -- better;
yat va -- whether; jayema -- we may conquer; yadi -- if; va -- or; nah -- us; jayeyuh -- they conquer; yan -those who; eva -- certainly; hatva -- by killing; na -- never; jijivisamah -- we would want to live; te -- all
of them; avasthitah -- are situated; pramukhe -- in the front; dhartarastrah -- the sons of Dhrtarastra.
TRANSLATION
Nor do we know which is better -- conquering them or being conquered by them. If we killed the sons of
Dhrtarastra, we should not care to live. Yet they are now standing before us on the battlefield.
Text 7
Being afflicted by the characteristics of miserliness and weakness, I ask You, confused in the heart about
my duty, what would be all-good - please tell me that in confidence; instruct me as I am surrendered to
You as Your disciple.
SANSKRIT

kârpanya-dosopahata-svabhâvah
prcchâmi tvâm dharma-sammûdha-cetâh
yac chreyah syân niscitam brûhi tan me
sisyas te 'ham sâdhi mâm tvâm prapannam
WORD FOR WORD
karpanya -- of miserliness; dosa -- by the weakness; upahata -- being afflicted; sva-bhavah -characteristics; prcchami -- I am asking; tvam -- unto You; dharma -- religion; sammudha -- bewildered;
cetah -- in heart; yat -- what; sreyah -- all-good; syat -- may be; niscitam -- confidently; bruhi -- tell; tat - that; me -- unto me; sisyah -- disciple; te -- Your; aham -- I am; sadhi -- just instruct; mam -- me; tvam - unto You; prapannam -- surrendered.
TRANSLATION
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of miserly weakness. In this
condition I am asking You to tell me for certain what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul
surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.
Text 8
I do not clearly see what would dispell the sadness drying up my senses in achieving [this way the]
unrivaled prosperity of a kingdom on earth or even the supremacy of the godly.'
SANSKRIT

na hi prapasyâmi mamâpanudyâd
yac chokam ucchosanam indriyânâm
avâpya bhûmâv asapatnam rddham
râjyam surânâm api câdhipatyam
WORD FOR WORD
na -- do not; hi -- certainly; prapasyami -- I see; mama -- my; apanudyat -- can drive away; yat -- that
which; sokam -- lamentation; ucchosanam -- drying up; indriyanam -- of the senses; avapya -- achieving;
bhumau -- on the earth; asapatnam -- without rival; rddham -- prosperous; rajyam -- kingdom; suranam -of the demigods; api -- even; ca -- also; adhipatyam -- supremacy.
TRANSLATION
I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my senses. I will not be able to dispel it
even if I win a prosperous, unrivaled kingdom on earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.
Text 9
Sañjaya said: "Thus addressing Hrisîkes'a, Gudâkes'a [Arjuna as the master of curbing ignorance], the
chastiser of the enemies said: ' I shall not fight'. After saying this to Govinda he then fell silent.
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
evam uktvâ hrsîkesam
gudâkesah parantapah
na yotsya iti govindam
uktvâ tûsnîm babhûva ha

WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; evam -- thus; uktva -- speaking; hrsikesam -- unto Krishna, the master of
the senses; gudakesah -- Arjuna, the master of curbing ignorance; parantapah -- the chastiser of the
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 3 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
enemies; na yotsye -- I shall not fight; iti -- thus; govindam -- unto Krishna, the giver of pleasure to the
senses; uktva -- saying; tusnim -- silent; babhuva -- became; ha -- certainly.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told Krishna, "Govinda, I shall not fight,"
and fell silent.
Text 10
O decendent of Bharata, there between the armies of both parties Hrisîkes'a spoke smiling to the
lamenting one the following words.
SANSKRIT

tam uvâca hrsîkesah
prahasann iva bhârata
senayor ubhayor madhye
visîdantam idam vacah
WORD FOR WORD
tam -- unto him; uvaca -- said; hrsikesah -- the master of the senses, Krishna; prahasan -- smiling; iva -like
that;
bharata
-O
Dhrtarastra,
descendant
of
Bharata; senayoh -- of the
armies; ubhayoh -- of both
parties; madhye -- between;
visidantam -- unto the lamenting
one; idam -- the following;
vacah -- words.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, at that
time Krishna, smiling, in the
midst of both the armies, spoke
the following words to the griefstricken Arjuna.
Text 11
The Supreme Lord said:'You are
lamenting about what is not
worth the lamenting and you
speak learned words as well whether lives are lost or not, the
wise never lament.
SANSKRIT

srî-bhagavân uvâca
asocyân anvasocas tvam
prajnâ-vâdâms ca bhâsase
gatâsûn agatâsûms ca
nânusocanti panditâh

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the
Supreme Personality of Godhead
said; asocyan -- not worthy of
lamentation; anvasocah -- you
are lamenting; tvam -- you;
prajna-vadan -- learned talks; ca
-- also; bhasase -- speaking; gata
-- lost; asun -- life; agata -- not
past; asun -- life; ca -- also; na - never; anusocanti -- lament;
panditah -- the learned.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not
worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor for the dead.
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 4 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 12
I never really did not exist whenever, nor did you; you nor any of all these kings - never shall also surely
all of us not exist hereafter.
SANSKRIT

na tv evâham jâtu nâsam
na tvam neme janâdhipâh
na caiva na bhavisyâmah
sarve vayam atah param

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; tu -- but; eva -- certainly; aham -- I; jatu -- at any time; na -- did not; asam -- exist; na -not; tvam -- you; na -- not; ime -- all these; jana-adhipah -- kings; na -- never; ca -- also; eva -- certainly;
na -- not; bhavisyamah -- shall exist; sarve vayam -- all of us; atah param -- hereafter.
TRANSLATION
Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us
cease to be.
Text 13
Of being embodied one knows the physical of boyhood, youth and old age - similarly does attaining to the
beyond of the body never delude the sober ones.
SANSKRIT

dehino 'smin yathâ dehe
kaumâram yauvanam jarâ
tathâ dehântara-prâptir
dhîras tatra na muhyati
WORD FOR WORD
dehinah -- of the embodied; asmin -- in this; yatha -- as; dehe -- in the body; kaumaram -- boyhood;
yauvanam -- youth; jara -- old age; tatha -- similarly; deha-antara -- of transference of the body; praptih - achievement; dhirah -- the sober; tatra -- thereupon; na -- never; muhyati -- is deluded.
TRANSLATION
As the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul
similarly passes into another body at death. A sober person is not bewildered by such a change.
Text 14
It is only sense perception, o son of Kuntî, like summer and winter, happiness and pain given, appear and
disappear; none of them are permanent, just try to tolerate it, o descendant of the Bharata dynasty.
SANSKRIT

mâtrâ-sparsâs tu kaunteya
sîtosna-sukha-duhkha-dâh
âgamâpâyino 'nityâs
tâms titiksasva bhârata

WORD FOR WORD
matra-sparsah -- sensory perception; tu -- only; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; sita -- winter; usna -- summer;
sukha -- happiness; duhkha -- and pain; dah -- giving; agama -- appearing; apayinah -- disappearing;
anityah -- nonpermanent; tan -- all of them; titiksasva -- just try to tolerate; bharata -- O descendant of
the Bharata dynasty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kuntî, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due
course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense
perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed.
Text 15
The person who is then never upset by all of this, o best among men, and is equal to and steady in distress
and happiness, is considered fit for liberation.
SANSKRIT

yam hi na vyathayanty ete
purusam purusarsabha
sama-duhkha-sukham dhîram
so 'mrtatvâya kalpate
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 5 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yam -- one to whom; hi -- certainly; na -- never; vyathayanti -- are distressing; ete -- all these; purusam -to a person; purusa-rsabha -- O best among men; sama -- unaltered; duhkha -- in distress; sukham -- and
happiness; dhiram -- patient; sah -- he; amrtatvaya -- for liberation; kalpate -- is considered eligible.
TRANSLATION
O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and distress and is steady in
both is certainly eligible for liberation.
Text 16
Never is there of falsehood [asat, the temporal form] any durability nor can one expect of the eternal
[sat, the true, the soul] any cessation, thus stress the seers who concluded to the study of both.
SANSKRIT

nâsato vidyate bhâvo
nâbhâvo vidyate satah
ubhayor api drsto 'ntas
tv anayos tattva-darsibhih
WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; asatah -- of the nonexistent; vidyate -- there is; bhavah -- endurance; na -- never; abhavah -changing quality; vidyate -- there is; satah -- of the eternal; ubhayoh -- of the two; api -- verily; drstah -observed; antah -- conclusion; tu -- indeed; anayoh -- of them; tattva -- of the truth; darsibhih -- by the
seers.
TRANSLATION
Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent [the material body] there is no
endurance and of the eternal [the soul] there is no change. This they have concluded by studying the
nature of both.
Text 17
Know that that by which the whole body is pervaded is imprerishabale and that no one is able to destroy
it.
SANSKRIT

avinâsi tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idam tatam
vinâsam avyayasyâsya
na kascit kartum arhati
WORD FOR WORD
avinasi -- imperishable; tu -- but; tat -- that; viddhi -- know it; yena -- by whom; sarvam -- all of the body;
idam -- this; tatam -- pervaded; vinasam -- destruction; avyayasya -- of the imperishable; asya -- of it; na
kascit -- no one; kartum -- to do; arhati -- is able.
TRANSLATION
That which pervades the entire body you should know to be indestructible. No one is able to destroy that
imperishable soul.
Text 18
All these material bodies are perishable while of the embodied soul it is said that it is never destroyed and
immeasurable, therefore fight o descendant of Bharata.
SANSKRIT

antavanta ime dehâ
nityasyoktâh sarîrinah
anâsino prameyasya
tasmâd yudhyasva bhârata

WORD FOR WORD
anta-vantah -- perishable; ime -- all these; dehah -- material bodies nityasya -- eternal in existence; uktah
-- are said; saririnah -- of the embodied soul; anasinah -- never to be destroyed; aprameyasya -immeasurable; tasmat -- therefore; yudhyasva -- fight; bharata -- O descendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
The material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal living entity is sure to come to an end;
therefore, fight, O descendant of Bharata.
Text 19
Anyone who supposes that this [soul] is the killer and also anyone who thinks that it can be killed, will of
either of both positions never be in knowledge; never does it kill or can it be killed.
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 6 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

ya enam vetti hantâram
yas cainam manyate hatam
ubhau tau na vijânîto
nâyam hanti na hanyate

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- anyone who; enam -- this; vetti -- knows; hantaram -- the killer; yah -- anyone who; ca -- also;
enam -- this; manyate -- thinks; hatam -- killed; ubhau -- both; tau -- they; na -- never; vijanitah -- are in
knowledge; na -- never; ayam -- this; hanti -- kills; na -- nor; hanyate -- is killed.
TRANSLATION
Neither he who thinks the living entity the slayer nor he who thinks it slain is in knowledge, for the self
slays not nor is slain.
Text 20
It is never born, nor does it ever die; never it came into existence nor will it cease to be - it will not take
rebirth, it is unborn, eternal and permanent; it is the oldest and is never killed when the body is killed.
SANSKRIT

na jâyate mriyate vâ kadâcin
nâyam bhûtvâ bhavitâ vâ na bhûyah
ajo nityah sâsvato 'yam purâno
na hanyate hanyamâne sarîre
WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; jayate -- takes birth; mriyate -- dies; va -- either; kadacit -- at any time (past, present or
future); na -- never; ayam -- this; bhutva -- having come into being; bhavita -- will come to be; va -- or;
na -- not; bhuyah -- or is again coming to be; ajah -- unborn; nityah -- eternal; sasvatah -- permanent;
ayam -- this; puranah -- the oldest; na -- never; hanyate -- is killed; hanyamane -- being killed; sarire -the body.
TRANSLATION
For the soul there is neither birth nor death at any time. He has not come into being, does not come into
being, and will not come into being. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing and primeval. He is not slain
when the body is slain.
Text 21
One who knows that this [soul] is the indestructible, always existing, which is unborn and immutable - how
can that person, o Pârtha, be the cause of killing or be killed?
SANSKRIT

vedâvinâsinam nityam
ya enam ajam avyayam
katham sa purusah pârtha
kam ghâtayati hanti kam

WORD FOR WORD
veda -- knows; avinasinam -- indestructible; nityam -- always existing; yah -- one who; enam -- this (soul);
ajam -- unborn; avyayam -- immutable; katham -- how; sah -- that; purusah -- person; Pârtha-- O
Pârtha(Arjuna); kam -- whom; ghatayati -- causes to hurt; hanti -- kills; kam -- whom.
TRANSLATION
O Pârtha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible, eternal, unborn and immutable kill
anyone or cause anyone to kill?
Text 22
Just like giving up worn out garments and accepting new ones, does the embodied [soul] the same way
give up old bodies and verily accept different new ones.
SANSKRIT

vâsâmsi jîrnâni yathâ vihâya
navâni grhnâti naro 'parâni
tathâ sarîrâni vihâya jîrnâny
anyâni samyâti navâni dehî
WORD FOR WORD
vasamsi -- garments; jirnani -- old and worn out; yatha -- just as; vihaya -- giving up; navani -- new
garments; grhnati -- does accept; narah -- a man; aparani -- others; tatha -- in the same way; sarirani --

Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 7 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
bodies; vihaya -- giving up; jirnani -- old and useless; anyani -- different; samyati -- verily accepts; navani
-- new sets; dehi -- the embodied.
TRANSLATION
As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, the soul similarly accepts new material bodies,
giving up the old and useless ones.
Text 23
Never can this soul be cut to pieces, be burnt by fire; nor can it drown in water or wither in the wind.
SANSKRIT

nainam chindanti sastrâni
nainam dahati pâvakah
na cainam kledayanty âpo
na sosayati mârutah

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; enam -- this soul; chindanti -- can cut to pieces; sastrani -- weapons; na -- never; enam -- this
soul; dahati -- burns;,pavakah -- fire; na -- never; ca -- also; enam -- this soul; kledayanti -- moistens;
apah -- water; na -- never; sosayati -- dries; marutah --wind.
TRANSLATION
The soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by fire,nor moistened by water, nor
withered by the wind.
Text 24
This unbreakable soul that cannot be burned, dissolve in water or dry up, is surely everlasting, allpervading, unchangeable, unmovable and primordial.
SANSKRIT

acchedyo 'yam adâhyo 'yam
akledyo 'sosya eva ca
nityah sarva-gatah sthânur
acalo 'yam sanâtanah

WORD FOR WORD
acchedyah -- unbreakable; ayam -- this soul; adahyah -- unable to be burned; ayam -- this soul; akledyah - insoluble; asosyah -- not able to be dried; eva -- certainly; ca -- and; nityah -- everlasting; sarva-gatah -all-pervading; sthanuh -- unchangeable; acalah -- immovable; ayam -- this soul; sanatanah -- eternally the
same.
TRANSLATION
This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned nor dried. He is everlasting,
present everywhere, unchangeable,immovable and eternally the same.
Text 25
As one speaks like this of it as being invisible, inconceivable and stable, you should know very well that
this soul never deserves lamentation.
SANSKRIT

avyakto 'yam acintyo 'yam
avikâryo 'yam ucyate
tasmâd evam viditvainam
nânusocitum arhasi

WORD FOR WORD
avyaktah -- invisible; ayam -- this soul; acintyah -- inconceivable; ayam -- this soul; avikaryah -unchangeable; ayam -- this soul; ucyate -- is said; tasmat -- therefore; evam -- like this; viditva -- knowing
it well; enam -- this soul; na -- do not; anusocitum -- to lament; arhasi -- you deserve.
TRANSLATION
It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable and immutable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for
the body.
Text 26
If, however, you think of it as always taking birth or finding death, still, o mighty armed one, it never
deserves lamentation.
SANSKRIT

atha cainam nitya-jâtam
nityam vâ manyase mrtam
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 8 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

tathâpi tvam mahâ-bâho
nainam socitum arhasi
WORD FOR WORD
atha -- if, however; ca -- also; enam -- this soul; nitya-jatam -- always born; nityam -- forever; va -either; manyase -- you so think; mrtam -- dead; tatha api -- still; tvam -- you; maha-baho -- O mightyarmed one; na -- never; enam -- about the soul; socitum -- to lament; arhasi -- deserve.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you think that the soul [or the symptoms of life] is always born and dies forever, you still
have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.
Text 27
Death is a certain fact for the one who is born and also is birth certain for the ones who died; they are
matters unavoidable that therefore do not deserve your lamentation.
SANSKRIT

jâtasya hi dhruvo mrtyur
dhruvam janma mrtasya ca
tasmâd aparihârye'rthe
na tvam socitum arhasi

WORD FOR WORD
jatasya -- of one who has taken his birth; hi -- certainly; dhruvah -- a fact; mrtyuh -- death; dhruvam -- it
is also a fact; janma -- birth; mrtasya -- of the dead; ca -- also; tasmat -- therefore; apariharye -- of that
which is unavoidable; arthe -- in the matter; na -- do not; tvam -- you; socitum -- to lament; arhasi -deserve.
TRANSLATION
One who has taken his birth is sure to die, and after death one is sure to take birth again. Therefore, in
the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you should not lament.
Text 28
In the beginning all are unmanifest, they are manifest in the middle, and in the end, o descendant of
Bharata, they are all gone, therefore why complain when it is all like that?
SANSKRIT

avyaktâdîni bhûtâni
vyakta-madhyâni bhârata
avyakta-nidhanâny eva
tatra kâ paridevanâ
WORD FOR WORD
avyakta-adini -- in the beginning unmanifested; bhutani -- all that are created; vyakta -- manifested;
madhyani -- in the middle; bharata -- O descendant of Bharata; avyakta -- nonmanifested; nidhanani -when vanquished; eva -- it is all like that; tatra -- therefore; ka -- what; paridevana -- lamentation.
TRANSLATION
All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their interim state, and unmanifest again
when annihilated. So what need is there for lamentation?
Text 29
Some see it as amazing, some speak of it as amazing and others surely come to know about it as being
amazing, while still others, even having heard about this soul, certainly never come to understand it.
SANSKRIT

âscaryavat pasyati kascid enam
âscaryavad vadati tathaiva cânyah.
âscaryavac cainam anyah srnoti
srutvâpy enam veda na caiva kascit
WORD FOR WORD
ascarya-vat -- as amazing; pasyati -- sees; kascit -- someone; enam -- this soul; ascarya-vat -- as amazing;
vadati -- speaks of; tatha -- thus; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; anyah -- another; ascarya-vat -- similarly
amazing; ca -- also; enam -- this soul; anyah -- another; srnoti -- hears of; srutva -- having heard; api -even; enam -- this soul; veda -- knows; na -- never; ca -- and; eva -- certainly; kascit -- someone.
TRANSLATION
Some look on the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and some hear of him as amazing, while
others, even after hearing about him, cannot understand him at all.
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 9 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 30
This soul, the eternal owner of the body of everyone, cannot be killed and therefore, o descendant of
Bharata, you should not grieve for any living being.
SANSKRIT

dehî nityam avadhyo 'yam
dehe sarvasya bhârata
tasmât sarvâni bhûtâni
na tvam socitum arhasi

WORD FOR WORD
dehi -- the owner of the material body; nityam -- eternally; avadhyah -- cannot be killed; ayam -- this
soul; dehe -- in the body; sarvasya -- of everyone; bharata -- O descendant of Bharata; tasmat -therefore; sarvani -- all; bhutani -- living entities (that are born); na -- never; tvam -- you; socitum -- to
lament; arhasi -- deserve.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body can never be slain. Therefore you need not grieve for
any living being.
Text 31
Also, indeed in considering your own duties you should not hesitate to fight for the sake of the religion, as
for a ruler truly there is no better engagement than that.
SANSKRIT

svadharmam api câveksya
na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyâddhi yuddhâc chreyo 'nyat
kshatriyasya na vidyate

WORD FOR WORD
sva-dharmam -- one's own religious principles; api -- also; ca -- indeed; aveksya -- considering; na -- never;
vikampitum -- to hesitate; arhasi -- you deserve; dharmyat -- for religious principles; hi -- indeed; yuddhat
-- than fighting; sreyah -- better engagement; anyat -- any other; kshatriyasya -- of the kshatriya; na -does not; vidyate -- exist.
TRANSLATION
Considering your specific duty as a Kshatriya, you should know that there is no better engagement for you
than fighting on religious principles; and so there is no need for hesitation.
Text 32
O son of Prithâ, happy are the rulers who do achieve to the war that came on its own accord, as to them
the gates of heaven are opened wide.
SANSKRIT

yadrcchayâ copapannam
svarga-dvâram apâvrtam
sukhinah ksatriyâh pârtha
labhante yuddham îdrsam

WORD FOR WORD
yadrcchaya -- by its own accord; ca -- also; upapannam -- arrived at svarga -- of the heavenly planets;
dvaram -- door; apavrtam -- wide open; sukhinah -- very happy; kshatriyah -- the members of the royal
order; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; labhante -- do achieve; yuddham -- war; idrsam -- like this.
TRANSLATION
O Prithâ, happy are the kshatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities come unsought, opening for them
the doors of the heavenly planets.
Text 33
Therefore you should do this fighting as a religious duty - not acting according your own nature; you will
lose your reputation and fall in sin.
SANSKRIT

atha cet tvam imam dharmyam
sangrâmam na karisyasi
tatah sva-dharmam kîrtim ca
hitvâ pâpam avâpsyasi
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 10 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
atha -- therefore; cet -- if; tvam -- you; imam -- this; dharmyam -- as a religious duty; sangramam -fighting; na -- do not; karisyasi -- perform; tatah -- then; sva-dharmam -- your religious duty; kirtim -reputation; ca -- also; hitva -- losing; papam -- sinful reaction; avapsyasi -- will gain.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you do not perform your religious duty of fighting, then you will certainly incur sins for
neglecting your duties and thus lose your reputation as a fighter.
Text 34
About your infamy people will always be speaking as for a respectable man infamy is worse than death.
SANSKRIT

akîrtim câpi bhûtâni
kathayisyanti te 'vyayâm
sambhâvitasya câkîrtir
maranâd atiricyate

WORD FOR WORD
akirtim -- infamy; ca -- also; api -- over and above; bhutani -- all people; kathayisyanti -- will speak; te -of you; avyayam -- forever; sambhavitasya -- for a respectable man; ca -- also; akirtih -- ill fame; maranat
-- than death; atiricyate -- becomes more.
TRANSLATION
People will always speak of your infamy, and for a respectable person, dishonor is worse than death.
Text 35
Ceasing out of fear leaving the battlefield, the great generals who are also holding you in great
estimation, will consider you as someone lower in value.
SANSKRIT

bhayâd ranâd uparatam
mamsyante tvâm mahâ-rathâh
yesâm ca tvam bahu-mato
bhûtvâ yâsyasi lâghavam

WORD FOR WORD
bhayat -- out of fear; ranat -- from the battlefield; uparatam -- ceased; mamsyante -- they will consider;
tvam -- you; maha-rathah -- the great generals; yesam -- for whom; ca -- also; tvam -- you; bahu-matah -in great estimation; bhutva -- having been; yasyasi --you will go; laghavam -- decreased in value.
TRANSLATION
The great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will think that you have left the
battlefield out of fear only, and thus they will consider you insignificant.
Text 36
Many of your enemies wil speak unkind words of you deriding your ability. What of course, is there more
painful than that?
SANSKRIT

avâcya-vâdâms ca bahûn
vadisyanti tavâhitâh
nindantas tava sâmarthyam
tato duhkhataram nu kim

WORD FOR WORD
avacya -- unkind; vadan -- fabricated words; ca -- also; bahun -- many; vadisyanti -- will say; tava -- your;
ahitah -- enemies; nindantah -- while vilifying; tava -- your; samarthyam -- ability; tatah -- than that;
duhkha-taram -- more painful; nu -- of course; kim -- what is there.
TRANSLATION
Your enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your ability. What could be more painful
for you?
Text 37
Either, being killed, you will attain the heavenly kingdom, or, conquering, you will enjoy the world;
therefore get up, O son of Kuntî, and fight with the certainty of determination
SANSKRIT

hato vâ prâpsyasi svargam
jitvâ vâ bhoksyase mahîm
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 11 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

tasmâd uttistha kaunteya
yuddhâya krta-niscayah
WORD FOR WORD
hatah -- being killed; va -- either; prapsyasi -- you gain; svargam -- the heavenly kingdom; jitva -- by
conquering; va -- or; bhoksyase -- you enjoy; mahim -- the world; tasmat -- therefore; uttistha -- get up;
kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; yuddhaya -- to fight; krta -- determined; niscayah -- in certainty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kuntî, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain the heavenly planets, or you will
conquer and enjoy the earthly kingdom. Therefore, get up with determination and fight.
Text 38
Equanimous in happiness and distress, gain and loss, victory and defeat; thereafter engaging for the sake
of fighting this way you will never incur any sin.
SANSKRIT

sukha-duhkhe same krtvâ
lâbhâlâbhau jayâjayau
tato yuddhâya yujyasva
naivam pâpam avâpsyasi

WORD FOR WORD
sukha -- happiness; duhkhe -- and distress; same -- in equanimity; krtva -- doing so; labha-alabhau -- both
profit and loss; jaya-ajayau -- both victory and defeat; tatah -- thereafter; yuddhaya -- for the sake of
fighting; yujyasva -- engage (fight); na -- never; evam -- in this way; papam -- sinful reaction; avapsyasi -you will gain.
TRANSLATION
Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness or distress, loss or gain, victory or
defeat -- and by so doing you shall never incur sin.

2b. On the results of labor
Text 39
All this I described to you was about the analytical study of the intelligence in yoga, but listen now how
dovetailed with that intelligence, o son of Prithâ, you can be released from the bondage of fruitive labor
[karma].
SANSKRIT

esâ te 'bhihitâ sânkhye
buddhir yoge tv imâm srnu
buddhyâ yukto yayâ pârtha
karma-bandham prahâsyasi
WORD FOR WORD
esa -- all this; te -- unto you; abhihita -- described; sankhye -- by analytical study; buddhih -- intelligence;
yoge -- in work without fruitive result; tu -- but; imam -- this; srnu- just hear; buddhya -- by intelligence;
yuktah -- dovetailed; yaya -- by which; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; karma-bandham -- bondage of reaction;
prahasyasi -- you can be released from.
TRANSLATION
Thus far I have described this knowledge to you through analytical study. Now listen as I explain it in
terms of working without fruitive results. O son of Prithâ, when you act in such knowledge you can free
yourself from the bondage of works.
Text 40
Endeavoring in it, there will never be loss or diminution and a little effort with it frees one from the
greatest danger.
SANSKRIT

nehâhikrama-nâso 'sti
pratyavâyo na vidyate
sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
trâyate mahato bhayât

WORD FOR WORD
na -- there is not; iha -- in this yoga; abhikrama -- in endeavoring; nasah -- loss; asti -- there is;
pratyavayah -- diminution; na -- never; vidyate -- there is; su-alpam -- a little; api -- although; asya -- of
this; dharmasya -- occupation; trayate -- releases; mahatah -- from very great; bhayat -- danger.
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 12 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on this path can protect one from
the most dangerous type of fear.
Text 41
Those with a strong resolve to the soul are one in intelligence, o child of the Kurus, while those who are
not of that determination have an intelligence which indeed is endlessly branched.
SANSKRIT

vyavasâyâtmikâ buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-sâkhâ hy anantâs ca
buddhayo 'vyavasâyinâm
WORD FOR WORD
vyavasaya-atmika -- resolute in Krishna consciousness; buddhih -- intelligence; eka -- only one; iha -- in
this world; kuru-nandana -- O beloved child of the Kurus; bahu-sakhah -- having various branches; hi -indeed; anantah -- unlimited; ca -- also; buddhayah -- intelligence; avyavasayinam -- of those who are not
in Krishna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. O beloved child of the Kurus,
the intelligence of those who are irresolute is many-branched.
Text 42-43
All these flowery words are [also] used by men with little knowledge who are followers of the Vedas and,
o son of Prithâ, proclaim that there is nothing else to it. With their hearts full of desire they aim at higher
spheres, a good birth and the grace of results by various pompous ceremonies to please their senses and to
progress towards opulence.
SANSKRIT

yâm imâm puspitâm vâcam
pravadanty avipascitah
veda-vâda-ratâh pârtha
nânyad astîti vâdinah
kâmâtmânah svarga-parâ
janma-karma-phala-pradâm
kriyâ-visesa-bahulâm
bhogaisvarya-gatim prati
WORD FOR WORD
yam imam -- all these; puspitam -- flowery; vacam -- words; pravadanti -- say; avipascitah -- men with a
poor fund of knowledge; veda-vada-ratah -- supposed followers of the Vedas; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; na - never; anyat -- anything else; asti -- there is; iti -- thus; vadinah -- the advocates;
kama-atmanah -- desirous of sense gratification; svarga-parah -- aiming to achieve heavenly planets;
janma-karma-phala-pradam -- resulting in good birth and other fruitive reactions; kriya-visesa -- pompous
ceremonies; bahulam -- various; bhoga -- in sense enjoyment; aisvarya -- and opulence; gatim -- progress;
prati -- towards.
TRANSLATION
Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the Vedas, which recommend
various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth.
Being desirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this.
Text 44
Those who by such things are too attached to material pleasure and opulence are bewildered in their mind
and arrive never at the determination of a mind controlled with intelligence.
SANSKRIT

bhogaisvarya-prasaktânâm
tayâpahrta-cetasâm
vyavasâyâtmikâ buddhih
samâdhau na vidhîyate
WORD FOR WORD
bhoga -- to material enjoyment; aisvarya -- and opulence; prasaktanam -- for those who are attached;
taya -- by such things; apahrta-cetasam -- bewildered in mind; vyavasaya-atmika -- fixed in determination;
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 13 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
buddhih -- devotional service to the Lord; samadhau -- in the controlled mind; na -- never; vidhiyate -does take place.
TRANSLATION
In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material opulence, and who are
bewildered by such things, the resolute determination for devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not
take place.
Text 45
The vedic literatures dealing with the modes of nature [goodness, passion and ignorance] tell you to
transcend them Arjuna, as outside the duality, fixed in the eternal of goodness, the soul is attained that is
unconcerned about possessing and acquiring.
SANSKRIT

trai-gunya-visayâ vedâ
nistraigunyo bhavârjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-ksema âtmavân

WORD FOR WORD
trai-gunya -- pertaining to the three modes of material nature; visayah-- on the subject matter; vedah -Vedic literatures; nistrai-gunyah --transcendental to the three modes of material nature; bhava -be;arjuna -- O Arjuna; nirdvandvah -- without duality; nitya-sattva-sthah-- in a pure state of spiritual
existence; niryoga-ksemah -- free from ideas of gain and protection; atma-van -- established in the self.
TRANSLATION
The Vedas deal mainly with the subject of the three modes of material nature. O Arjuna, become
transcendental to these three modes. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety,
and be established in the self.
Text 46
All good of water found in a single well is in all respects found in a great reservoir - similarly all that is
found in the Vedas can be appreciated in a spiritual man complete in knowledge.
SANSKRIT

yâvân artha udapâne
sarvatah samplutodake
tâvân sarvesu vedesu
brâhmanasya vijânatah

WORD FOR WORD
yavan -- all that; arthah -- is meant; uda-pane -- in a well of water; sarvatah -- in all respects; samplutaudake -- in a great reservoir of water; tavan -- similarly; sarvesu -- in all; vedesu -- Vedic literatures;
brahmanasya -- of the man who knows the Supreme Brahman; vijanatah -- who is in complete knowledge.
TRANSLATION
All purposes served by a small well can at once be served by a great reservoir of water. Similarly, all the
purposes of the Vedas can be served to one who knows the purpose behind them.
Text 47
You certainly have the right to do your duty but not the claim over the fruits whenever; never see yourself
as the cause of the results as you should never let attachment accompany a religious duty.
SANSKRIT

karmany evâdhikâras te
mâ phalesu kadâcana
mâ karma-phala-hetur bhûr
mâ te sango 'stv akarmani
WORD FOR WORD
karmani -- in prescribed duties; eva -- certainly; adhikarah -- right; te -- of you; ma -- never; phalesu -- in
the fruits; kadacana -- at any ,time; ma -- never; karma-phala -- in the result of the work; hetuh -- cause;
bhuh -- become; ma -- never; te -- of you; sangah -- attachment; astu -- there should be; akarmani -- in
not doing prescribed duties.
TRANSLATION
You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to the fruits of action. Never
consider yourself the cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 14 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 48
Do your work staying connected thus in giving up that association O Dhanañjaya [Arjuna as the one
conquering the wealth] and stay balanced in success and failure as the realization of this equanimity is
what is called yoga.
SANSKRIT

yoga-sthah kuru karmâni
sangam, tyaktvâ dhananjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoh samo bhûtvâ
samatvam yoga ucyate

WORD FOR WORD
yoga-sthah -- equipoised; kuru -- perform; karmani -- your duties;sangam -- attachment; tyaktva -- giving
up; dhananjaya -- O Arjuna;siddhi-asiddhyoh -- in success and failure; samah -- equipoised; bhutva-becoming; samatvam -- equanimity; yogah -- yoga; ucyate -- iscalled.
TRANSLATION
Perform your duty equipoised, O Arjuna, abandoning all attachment to success or failure. Such equanimity
is called yoga.
Text 49
Keep your self for sure far away from abominable acts with that intelligence of yoga, Dhananjana, in the
full surrender of such consciousness - as it are the misers who try for the sake of the result.
SANSKRIT

dûrena hy avaram karma
buddhi-yogâd dhananjaya
buddhau saranam anviccha
krpanâh phala-hetavah
WORD FOR WORD
durena -- discard it at a long distance; hi -- certainly; avaram -- abominable; karma -- activity; buddhiyogat -- on the strength of Krishna consciousness; dhananjaya -- O conqueror of wealth; buddhau --in such
consciousness; saranam -- full surrender; anviccha -- try for; krpanah -- misers; phala-hetavah -- those
desiring fruitive results.
TRANSLATION
O Dhanañjaya, keep all abominable activities far distant by devotional service, and in that consciousness
surrender unto the Lord. Those who want to enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.
Text 50
One aligned in this intelligence can in this life get rid of both good and bad results, therefore, for the sake
of yoga, engage being connected; that is the art in all activities.
SANSKRIT

buddhi-yukto jahâtîha
ubhe sukrta-duskrte
tasmâd yogâya yujyasva
yogah karmasu kausalam

WORD FOR WORD
buddhi-yuktah -- one who is engaged in devotional service; jahati -- can get rid of; iha -- in this life; ubhe
-- both; sukrta-duskrte -- good and bad results; tasmat -- therefore; yogaya -- for the sake of devotional
service; yujyasva -- be so engaged; yogah -- Krishna consciousness; karmasu -- in all activities; kausalam -art.
TRANSLATION
A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad actions even in this life. Therefore
strive for yoga, which is the art of all work.
Text 51
Being immersed in working for this, aligned in the intelligence of giving up the results, liberated the great
sages and devotees from the bondage of birth and death as they reached a position of being free from
miseries.
SANSKRIT

karma-jam buddhi-yuktâ hi
phalam tyaktvâ manîsinah
janma-bandha-vinirmuktâh
padam gacchanty anâmayam
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 15 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
karma-jam -- due to fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktah -- being engaged in devotional service; hi -certainly; phalam -- results; tyaktva -- giving up; manisinah -- great sages or devotees; janma-bandha -from the bondage of birth and death; vinirmuktah -- liberated; padam -- position; gacchanti -- they reach;
anamayam -- without miseries.
TRANSLATION
By thus engaging in devotional service to the Lord, great sages or devotees free themselves from the
results of work in the material world. In this way they become free from the cycle of birth and death and
attain the state beyond all miseries [by going back to Godhead].
Text 52
When your intelligence surpasses the confusion of illusion, at that time you shall be indifferent about all
this you are about to hear and have already heard of.
SANSKRIT

yadâ te moha-kalilam
buddhir vyatitarisyati
tadâ gantâsi nirvedam
srotavyasya srutasya ca
WORD FOR WORD
yada -- when; te -- your; moha -- of illusion; kalilam -- dense forest; buddhih -- transcendental service
with intelligence; vyatitarisyati -- surpasses; tada -- at that time; ganta asi -- you shall go; nirvedam -callousness; srotavyasya -- toward all that is to be heard; srutasya -- all that is already heard; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
When your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion, you shall become indifferent to all
that has been heard and all that is to be heard.
Text 53
When, without being confused about results with these revelations, you remain unmoved in transcendence
with a fixed intelligence, then you will achieve selfrealisation."
SANSKRIT

sruti-vipratipannâ te
yadâ sthâsyati niscalâ
samâdhâv acalâ buddhis
tadâ yogam avâpsyasi
WORD FOR WORD
sruti -- of Vedic revelation; vipratipanna -- without being influenced by the fruitive results; te -- your;
yada -- when; sthasyati -- remains; niscala -- unmoved; samadhau -- in transcendental consciousness, or
Krishna consciousness; acala -- unflinching; buddhih -- intelligence; tada -- at that time; yogam -- selfrealization; avapsyasi -- you will achieve.
TRANSLATION
When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas, and when it remains fixed in
the trance of self-realization, then you will have attained the divine consciousness.
Text 54
Arjuna said: "What are the signs of one fixed in consciousness, in transcendence - and what does one who
is fixed in wisdom say, how does he keep still and how does he move?"
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
sthita-prajnasya kâ bhâsâ
samâdhi-sthasya kesava
sthita-dhîh kim prabhâseta
kim âsîta vrajeta kim
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; sthita-prajnasya -- of one who is situated in fixedKrishna consciousness; ka -what; bhasa -- language; samadhi-sthasya -- of one situated in trance; kesava -- O Krishna; sthita-dhih -one fixed in Krishna consciousness; kim -- what; prabhaseta -- speaks; kim -- how; asita -- does remain
still; vrajeta -- walks; kim -- how.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Krishna, what are the symptoms of one whose consciousness is thus merged in
transcendence? How does he speak, and what is his language? How does he sit, and how does he walk?
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 16 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 55
The Supreme Lord said: "Giving up the various desires and their ruminations to the self, o son of Prithâ, at
that time, one says, satisfied by that purified mind, one becomes steady in ones consciousness.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
prajahâti yadâ kâmân
sarvân pârtha mano-gatân
âtmany evâtmanâ tustah
sthita-prajnas tadocyate

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prajahati -- gives up; yada -- when;
kaman -- desires for sense gratification; sarvan -- of all varieties; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; manah-gatan -of mental concoction; atmani -- in the pure state of the soul; eva -- certainly; atmana -- by the purified
mind; tustah -- satisfied; sthita-prajnah -- transcendentally situated; tada -- at that time; ucyate -- is
said.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Prithâ, when a man gives up all varieties of desire for sense
gratification, which arise from mental concoction, and when his mind, thus purified, finds satisfaction in
the self alone, then he is said to be in pure transcendental consciousness.
Text 56
Those who without worrying face the miseries and without interest face happiness and who are free from
attachment, fear and anger, are called sages [munis] whose meditation is steady.
SANSKRIT

duhkhesv anudvigna-manâh
sukhesu vigata-sprhah
vîta-râga-bhaya-krodhah
sthita-dhîr munir ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
duhkhesu -- in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manah -- without being agitated in mind; sukhesu -- in
happiness; vigata-sprhah -- without being interested; vita -- free from; raga -- attachment; bhaya -- fear;
krodhah -- and anger; sthita-dhih -- whose mind is steady; munih -- a sage; ucyate -- is called.
TRANSLATION
One who is not disturbed in mind even amidst the threefold miseries or elated when there is happiness,
and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.
Text 57
He who, whether achieving good or evil with it, is unaffected with it wherever and neither prefers or
hates, is fixed in perfect knowledge.
SANSKRIT

yah sarvatrânabhisnehas
tat tat prâpya subhâsubham
nâbhinandati na dvesti
tasya prajnâ pratisthitâ

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- one who; sarvatra -- everywhere; anabhisnehah -- without affection; tat -- that; tat -- that; prapya
-- achieving; subha -- good; asubham -- evil; na -- never; abhinandati -- praises; na -- never; dvesti -envies; tasya -- his; prajna -- perfect knowledge; pratisthita -- fixed.
TRANSLATION
In the material world, one who is unaffected by whatever good or evil he may obtain, neither praising it
nor despising it, is firmly fixed in perfect knowledge.
Text 58
When his consciousness is fixed he withdraws like a tortoise does with its limbs, all his senses from the
sense objects.
SANSKRIT

yadâ samharate câyam
kûrmo 'ngânîva sarvasah
indriyânîndriyârthebhyas
tasya prajnâ pratisthitâ

Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 17 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yada -- when; samharate -- winds up; ca -- also; ayam -- he; kurmah -- tortoise; angani -- limbs; iva -- like;
sarvasah -- altogether; indriyani -- senses; indriya-arthebhyah -- from the sense objects; tasya -- his;
prajna -- consciousness; pratisthita -- fixed.
TRANSLATION
One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the tortoise draws its limbs within the shell,
is firmly fixed in perfect consciousness.
Text 59
By restrictions one may refrain from the sense objects, but for the embodied soul giving up the taste the
relation remains that he, experiencing the higher, ceases from.
SANSKRIT

visayâ vinivartante
nirâhârasya dehinah
rasa-varjam raso 'py asya
param drstvâ nivartate
WORD FOR WORD
visayah -- objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante -- are practiced to be refrained from; niraharasya -by negative restrictions; dehinah -- for the embodied; rasa-varjam -- giving up the taste; rasah -- sense of
enjoyment; api -- although there is; asya -- his; param -- far superior things; drstva -- by experiencing;
nivartate -- he ceases from.
TRANSLATION
The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the taste for sense objects remains.
But, ceasing such engagements by experiencing a higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.
Text 60
While endeavoring surely, in spite of, o son of Kuntî, a man's full discrimination, the senses forcibly take
away the mind agitating it.
SANSKRIT

yatato hy api kaunteya
purusasya vipascitah
indriyâni pramâthîni
haranti prasabham manah
WORD FOR WORD
yatatah -- while endeavoring; hi -- certainly; api
-- in spite of; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî;
purusasya -- of a man; vipascitah -- full of
discriminating knowledge; indriyani -- the
senses; pramathini -- agitating; haranti -throw; prasabham -- by force; manah -- the
mind.
TRANSLATION
The senses are so strong and impetuous, O
Arjuna, that they forcibly carry away the mind
even of a man of discrimination who is
endeavoring to control them.
Text 61
Keeping all those senses engaged under control,
one should be situated in the relationship with
the beyond, as the one who has his senses fully
subjugated is surely established in wisdom.
SANSKRIT

tâni sarvâni samyamya
yukta âsîta mat-parah
vase hi yasyendriyâni
tasya prajnâ pratisthitâ

WORD FOR WORD
tani -- those senses; sarvani -- all; samyamya -- keeping under control; yuktah -- engaged; asita -- should
be situated; mat-parah -- in relationship with Me; vase -- in full subjugation; hi -- certainly; yasya -- one
whose; indriyani -- senses; tasya -- his; prajna -- consciousness; pratisthita -- fixed.
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 18 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
One who restrains his senses, keeping them under full control, and fixes his consciousness upon Me, is
known as a man of steady intelligence.
Text 62
Facing sense-objects a person develops attachment.for those objects. From that attachment desire
develops and from that desire anger [the drift of passion] arises.
SANSKRIT

dhyâyato visayân pumsah
sangas tesûpajâyate
sangât sanjâyate kâmah
kâmât krodho 'bhijâyate
WORD FOR WORD
dhyayatah -- while contemplating; visayan -- sense objects; pumsah -- of a person; sangah -- attachment;
tesu -- in the sense objects; upajayate -- develops; sangat -- from attachment; sanjayate -- develops;
kamah -- desire; kamat -- from desire; krodhah -- anger; abhijayate -- becomes manifest.
TRANSLATION
While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment for them, and from such
attachment lust develops, and from lust anger arises.
Text 63
From anger [losing one's order] one gets illusioned and from illusion the memory gets bewildered. With the
memory disturbed one loses one's intelligence and from that loss of intelligence one falls down.
SANSKRIT

krodhâd bhavati sammohah
sammohât smrti-vibhramah
smrti-bhramsâd buddhi-nâso
buddhi-nâsât pranasyati

WORD FOR WORD
krodhat -- from anger; bhavati -- takes place; sammohah -- perfect illusion; sammohat -- from illusion;
smrti -- of memory; vibhramah -- bewilderment; smrti-bhramsat -- after bewilderment of memory;
buddhi-nasah -- loss of intelligence; buddhi-nasat -- and from loss of intelligence; pranasyati -- one falls
down.
TRANSLATION
From anger, complete delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory. When memory is
bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost one falls down again into the material pool.
Text 64
But one who has become free from attachment and aversion having the senses acting upon the senseobjects under control, will, regulating himself thus, attain the clarity.
SANSKRIT

râga-dvesa-vimuktais tu
visayân indriyais caran
âtma-vasyair vidheyâtmâ
prasâdam adhigacchati
WORD FOR WORD
raga -- attachment; dvesa -- and detachment; vimuktaih -- by one who has become free from; tu -- but;
visayan -- sense objects; indriyaih -- by the senses; caran -- acting upon; atma-vasyaih -- under one's
control; vidheya-atma -- one who follows regulated freedom; prasadam -- the mercy of the Lord;
adhigacchati -- attains.
TRANSLATION
But a person free from all attachment and aversion and able to control,his senses through regulative
principles of freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord.
Text 65
From that tranquility all misery will find its end and of such a happy mind soon the intuition will become
sufficiently established.
SANSKRIT

prasâde sarva-duhkhânâm
hânir asyopajâyate
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 19 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

prasanna-cetaso hy âsu
buddhih paryavatisthate
WORD FOR WORD
prasade -- on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva -- of all; duhkhanam -- material
miseries; hanih -- destruction; asya -- his; upajayate -- takes place; prasanna-cetasah -- of the happyminded; hi -- certainly; asu -- very soon; buddhih -- intelligence; pari -- sufficiently; avatisthate -becomes established.
TRANSLATION
For one thus satisfied [in Krishna consciousness], the threefold miseries of material existence exist no
longer; in such satisfied consciousness, one's intelligence is soon well established.
Text 66
There can't be intelligence if one is not aligned to this and without that connectedness one will not be
steady in ones respect; missing that peace how can one of such discontent be happy?
SANSKRIT

nâsti buddhir ayuktasya
na câyuktasya bhâvanâ
na câbhâvayatah sântir
asântasya kutah sukham

WORD FOR WORD
na asti -- there cannot be; buddhih -- transcendental intelligence; ayuktasya -- of one who is not
connected (with Krishna consciousness); na -- not; ca -- and; ayuktasya -- of one devoid of Krishna
consciousness; bhavana -- fixed mind (in happiness); na -- not; ca -- and; abhavayatah -- of one who is not
fixed; santih -- peace; asantasya -- of the unpeaceful; kutah -- where is; sukham -- happiness.
TRANSLATION
One who is not connected with the Supreme [in Krishna consciousness] can have neither transcendental
intelligence nor a steady mind, without which there is no possibility of peace. And how can there be any
happiness without peace?
Text 67
The mind by roaming with the senses surely becomes preoccupied [with the material interest] as the
intelligence is taken away the way the wind takes a boat away on the water.
SANSKRIT

indriyânâm hi caratâm
yan mano 'nuvidhîyate
tad asya harati prajnâm
vâyur nâvam ivâmbhasi
WORD FOR WORD
indriyanam -- of the senses; hi -- certainly; caratam -- while roaming; yat -- with which; manah -- the
mind; anuvidhiyate -- becomes nconstantly engaged; tat -- that; asya -- his; harati -- takes away; prajnam
-- intelligence; vayuh -- wind; navam -- a boat; iva -- like;ambhasi -- on the water.
TRANSLATION
As a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one of the roaming senses on which the mind
focuses can carry away a man's intelligence.
Text 68
Therefore, o mighty armed, one who tied his senses down from their objects is of steady intelligence.
SANSKRIT

tasmâd yasya mahâ-bâho
nigrhîtâni sarvasah
indriyânîndriyârthebhyas
tasya prajnâ pratisthitâ

WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; yasya -- whose; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; nigrhitani -- so curbed down;
sarvasah -- all around; indriyani -- them senses; indriya-arthebhyah -- from sense objects; tasya -- his;
prajna -- intelligence; pratisthita -- fixed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their objects is certainly of steady
intelligence...
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 20 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 69
To what is night to all living beings the selfcontrolled are wakeful and to what all these beings are wakeful
is as night to the introspective wise.
SANSKRIT

yâ nisâ sarva-bhûtânâm
tasyâm jâgarti samyamî
yasyâm jâgrati bhûtâni
sâ nisâ pasyato muneh

WORD FOR WORD
ya -- what; nisa -- is night; sarva -- all; bhutanam -- of living entities; tasyam -- in that; jagarti -- is
wakeful; samyami -- the self-controlled; yasyam -- in which; jagrati -- are awake; bhutani -- all beings; sa
-- that is; nisa -- night; pasyatah -- for the introspective; muneh -- sage.
TRANSLATION
What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled; and the time of awakening for
all beings is night for the introspective sage.
Text 70
Like the ocean that is steady in always being filled by the waters entering it, so also a person of peace is
steady with the desires entering and not the one who is desiring.
SANSKRIT

âpâryamânam acala-pratistham
samudram âpah pravisanti yadvat
tadvat kâmâ yam pravisanti sarve
sa sântim âpnoti na kâma-kâmî
WORD FOR WORD
apuryamanam -- always being filled; acala-pratistham -- steadily situated; samudram -- the ocean; apah -waters; pravisanti -- enter; yadvat -- as; tadvat -- so; kamah -- desires; yam -- unto whom; pravisanti -enter; sarve -- all; sah -- that person; santim -- peace; apnoti -- achieves; na -- not; kama-kami -- one who
desires to fulfill desires.
TRANSLATION
A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires -- that enter like rivers into the ocean,
which is ever being filled but is always still -- can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to
satisfy such desires.
Text 71
A person who has given up all desires living free from longing, without striving for possessions and
identifying with the body, attains peace.
SANSKRIT

vihâya kâmân yah sarvân
pumâms carati nihsprhah
nirmamo nirahankârah
sa sântim adhigacchati

WORD FOR WORD
vihaya -- giving up; kaman -- material desires for sense gratification; yah -- who; sarvan -- all; puman -- a
person; carati -- lives; nihsprhah -- desireless; nirmamah -- without a sense of proprietorship;
nirahankarah -- without false ego; sah -- he; santim -- perfect peace; adhigacchati -- attains.
TRANSLATION
A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who lives free from desires, who has given up
all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of false ego -- he alone can attain real peace.
Text 72
This spiritual condition, o son of Prithâ, will never achieving it bewilder you. Being situated in it, even at
the end of one's life the kingdom of God is attained with it.
SANSKRIT

esâ brâhmî sthitih pârtha
nainâm prâpya vimuhyati
sthitvâsyâm anta-kâle 'pi
brahma-nirvânam rcchati
Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 21 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
esa -- this; brahmi -- spiritual; sthitih -- situation; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; na -- never; enam -- this;
prapya -- achieving; vimuhyati -- one is bewildered; sthitva -- being situated; asyam -- in this; anta-kale -at the end of life; api -- also; brahma-nirvanam -- the spiritual kingdom of God; rcchati -- one attains.
TRANSLATION
That is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which a man is not bewildered. If one is
thus situated even at the hour of death, one can enter into the kingdom of God.

Chapter 2 - The Yoga of Analytic Knowledge

…Page 22 of 22

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 3

The Yoga of Action

On mastering the intelligence
Text 1
Arjuna said: 'If being intelligent is considered better than doing fruitive work, as You said o Janârdana,
then why are You engaging me in this ghastly action Kes'ava?
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
jyâyasî cet karmanas te
matâ buddhir janârdana
tat kim karmani ghore mâm
niyojayasi kesava
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; jyayasi -- better; cet -- if; karmanah --than fruitive action; te -- by You;
mata -- is considered; buddhih --intelligence; janardana -- O Krishna; tat -- therefore; kim -- why;-karmani
-- in action; ghore -- ghastly; mam -- me; niyojayasi -- You are engaging; kesava -- O Krishna.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Janardana, O Kes'ava, why do You want to engage me in this ghastly warfare, if You think
that intelligence is better than fruitive work?
Text 2
Surely you are confusing my intelligence with your equivocal words, therefore please make sure you tell
me of one only so that I may really benefit from it.
SANSKRIT

vyâmisreneva vâkyena
buddhim mohayasîva me
tad ekam vada niscitya
yena sreyo 'ham âpnuyâm
WORD FOR WORD
vyamisrena -- by equivocal; iva -- certainly; vakyena -- words; buddhim -- intelligence; mohayasi -- You
are bewildering; iva -- certainly; me-- my; tat -- therefore; ekam -- only one; vada -- please tell; niscitya - ascertaining; yena -- by which; sreyah -- real benefit; aham -- I; apnuyam -- may have.
TRANSLATION
My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions.Therefore, please tell me decisively which
will be most beneficial for me.
Text 3
The Supreme Lord said: 'In this world there are two kinds of faith, as I told you before o sinless one, it is
the linking of oneself in the knowledge of the analytic mind [to attain to stability of intelligence] and the
connectedness in action [forsaking the desire for the fruits] as practiced by the mystical [the volition of yoga].
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 1 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

srî-bhagavân uvâca
loke 'smin dvi-vidhâ nisthâ
purâ proktâ mayânagha
jnâna-yogena sânkhyânâm
karma-yogena yoginâm
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke --in the world; asmin -- this; dvividha -- two kinds of; nistha --faith; pura -- formerly; prokta -- were said; maya -- by Me; anagha --O
sinless one; jñâna-yogena -- by the linking process of knowledge; sankhyanam -- of the empiric
philosophers; karma-yogena -- by the linking process of devotion; yoginam -- of the devotees.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O
sinless Arjuna, I have already explained that
there are two classes of men who try to realize
the self. Some are inclined to understand it by
empirical, philosophical speculation, and others
by devotional service.
Text 4
Nor by forsaking work does a man attain to
liberation nor does he attain to success by simply
renouncing [the fruits].
SANSKRIT

na karmanâm anârambhân
naiskarmyam puruso 'snute
na ca sannyâsanâd eva
siddhim samadhigacchati

WORD FOR WORD
na -- not; karmanam -- of prescribed duties;
anarambhat -- by nonperformance; naiskarmyam
-- freedom from reaction; purusah -- a man;
asnute -- achieves; na -- nor; ca -- also;
sannyâsanat -- by renunciation; eva -- simply;
siddhim -- success; samadhigacchati --attains.
TRANSLATION
Not by merely abstaining from work can one
achieve freedom from reaction, nor by
renunciation alone can one attain perfection.
Text 5
Surely no one is but for a moment without action
and certainly everyone is irresistably drawn to fruitive work [undergo karma] according the qualities born
from the modes of nature.
SANSKRIT

na hi kascit ksanam api
jâtu tisthaty akarmakrt
kâryate hy avasah karma
sarvah prakriti-jair gunaih
WORD FOR WORD
na -- nor; hi -- certainly; kascit -- anyone; ksanam -- a moment; api-- also; jatu -- at any time; tisthati -remains; akarma-krt --without doing something; karyate -- is forced to do; hi -- certainly;avasah -helplessly; karma -- work; sarvah -- all; prakriti-jaih --born of the modes of material nature; gunaih -- by
the qualities.
TRANSLATION
Everyone is forced to act helplessly according to the qualities he has acquired from the modes of material
nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing something, not even for a moment.
Text 6
Anyone who, controlling the senses, in his mind keeps to thinking on the sense-objects is a foolish soul
called a pretender.
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 2 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

karmendriyâni samyamya
ya âste manasâ smaran
indriyârthân vimûdhâtmâ
mithyâcârah sa ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
karma-indriyani -- the five working sense organs; samyamya -- controlling; yah -- anyone who; aste -remains; manasa -- by the mind; smaran -- thinking of; indriya-arthan -- sense objects; vimudha -- foolish;
atma -- soul; mithya-acarah -- pretender; sah -- he; ucyate -- is called.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains the senses of action but whose mind dwells on sense objects certainly deludes himself
and is called a pretender.
Text 7
But one who, regulating the senses with his mind, o Arjuna, makes a beginning with connecting his senses
in working without the attachment of desiring the fruits [karma-yoga] - he is by far the better.
SANSKRIT

yas tv indriyâni manasâ
niyamyârabhate 'rjuna
karmendriyaih karma-yogam
asaktah sa visisyate

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- one who; tu -- but; indriyani -- the senses; manasa -- by the mind; niyamya -- regulating; arabhate - begins; Arjuna -- O Arjuna; karma-indriyaih -- by the active sense organs; karma-yogam -- devotion;
asaktah -- without attachment; sah -- he; visisyate -- is by far the better.
TRANSLATION
On the other hand, if a sincere person tries to control the active senses by the mind and begins karmayoga [in Krishna consciousness] without attachment, he is by far superior.
Text 8
Do your precribed duties, as working for certain is better than not to work - even your bodily maintenance
is never without the effect of work.
SANSKRIT

niyatam kuru karma tvam
karma jyâyo hy akarmanah
sarîra-yâtrâpi ca te
na prasiddhyed akarmanah
WORD FOR WORD
niyatam -- prescribed; kuru -- do; karma -- duties; tvam -- you; karma -- work; jyayah -- better; hi -certainly; akarmanah -- than no work; sarira -- bodily; yatra -- maintenance; api -- even; ca -- also; te -your; na -- never; prasiddhyet -- is effected; akarmanah -- without work.
TRANSLATION
Perform your prescribed duty, for doing so is better than not working. One cannot even maintain one's
physical body without work.
Text 9
Work for the purpose of sacrifice, otherwise work in this world will bind you. Work done for that sake, o
son of Kuntî, will liberate you perfectly from that [material] association.
SANSKRIT

yajnârthât karmano 'nyatra
loko 'yam karma-bandhanah
tad-artham karma kaunteya
mukta-sangah samâcara

WORD FOR WORD
yajna-arthat -- done only for the sake of Yajna, or Vishnu; karmanah -- than work; anyatra -- otherwise;
lokah -- world; ayam -- this; karma-bandhanah -- bondage by work; tat -- of Him; artham -- for the sake;
karma -- work; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; mukta-sangah -- liberated from association; samacara -- do perfectly.

Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 3 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Work done as a sacrifice for Vishnu has to be performed, otherwise work causes bondage in this material
world. Therefore, O son of Kuntî, perform your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you
will always remain free from bondage.
Text 10
In the coming about in the beginning of the generations, along with the sacrifices the Lord of mankind
[Brahmâ] said to this: 'Be more and more prosperous; may this [sacrifice] bestow upon you all that you desire'
SANSKRIT

saha-yajnâh prajâh srstvâ
purovâca prajâpatih
anena prasavisyadhvam
esa vo 'stv ista-kâma-dhuk

WORD FOR WORD
saha -- along with; yajnah -- sacrifices; prajah -- generations; srstva -- creating; pura -- anciently; uvaca -said; praja-patih -- the Lord of creatures; anena -- by this; prasavisyadhvam -- be more and more
prosperous; esah -- this; vah -- your; astu -- let it be; ista -- of all desirable things; kama-dhuk -bestower.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth generations of men and demigods, along
with sacrifices for Vishnu, and blessed them by saying, "Be thou happy by this yajna [sacrifice] because its
performance will bestow upon you everything desirable for living happily and achieving liberation."
Text 11
Having pleased the godly by sacrifices, the godly will please you and thus mutually pleasing one another
you will achieve the Supreme.
SANSKRIT

devân bhâvayatânena
te devâ bhâvayantu vah
parasparam bhâvayantah
sreyah param avâpsyatha

WORD FOR WORD
devan -- demigods; bhavayata -- having pleased; anena -- by this sacrifice; te -- those; devah -- demigods;
bhavayantu -- will please; vah -- you; parasparam -- mutually; bhavayantah -- pleasing one another;
sreyah -- benediction; param -- the supreme; avapsyatha -- you will achieve.
TRANSLATION
The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you, and thus, by cooperation between men
and demigods, prosperity will reign for all.
Text 12
The gods satisfied by sacrifice will surely award you with the necessities of life, but he who enjoys the
things given without offering is certainly a thief.
SANSKRIT

istân bhogân hi vo devâ
dâsyante yajna-bhâvitâh
tair dattân apradâyaibhyo
yo bhunkte stena eva sah
WORD FOR WORD
istan -- desired; bhogan -- necessities of life; hi -- certainly; vah -- unto you; devah -- the demigods;
dasyante -- will award; yajna-bhavitah -- being satisfied by the performance of sacrifices;taih -- by them;
dattan -- things given; apradaya -- without offering; ebhyah -- to these demigods; yah -- he who; bhunkte
-- enjoys; stenah -- thief; eva -- certainly; sah -- he.
TRANSLATION
In charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being satisfied by the performance of yajna
[sacrifice], will supply all necessities to you. But he who enjoys such gifts without offering them to the
demigods in return is certainly a thief.
Text 13
Eating of the sacrifices the devoted find relief of all kinds of sin, but the impious who consider just to
please their senses only eat of trouble.
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 4 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

yajna-sistâsinah santo
mucyante sarva-kilbisaih
bhunjate te tv agham pâpâ
ye pacanty âtma-kâranât
WORD FOR WORD
yajna-sista -- of food taken after performance of yajna; asinah -- eaters; santah -- the devotees; mucyante
-- get relief; sarva -- all kinds of; kilbisaih -- from sins; bhunjate -- enjoy; te -- they; tu -- but; agham -grievous sins; papah -- sinners; ye -- who; pacanti -- prepare food; atma-karanat -- for sense enjoyment.
TRANSLATION
The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat food which is offered first
for sacrifice. Others, who prepare food for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.
Text 14
From grains material bodies grow, from rains there is the production of grains while rains become possible
with the [watering by ] sacrifices that are performed out of duty.
SANSKRIT

annâd bhavanti bhûtâni
parjanyâd anna-sambhavah
yajnâd bhavati parjanyo
yajnah karma-samudbhavah
WORD FOR WORD
annat -- from grains; bhavanti -- grow; bhutani -- the material bodies; parianyat -- from rains; anna -- of
food grains; sambhavah -- production; yajnat -- from the performance of sacrifice; bhavati -- becomes
possible; parjanyah -- rain; yajnah -- performance of yajna; karma -- prescribed duties; samudbhavah -born of.
TRANSLATION
All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains. Rains are produced by performance
of yajna [sacrifice], and yajna is born of prescribed duties.
Text 15
Ones duty is realized through the culture of knowledge while the regulation of that knowledge is of the
Supreme, therefore in sacrifice one will always find the all-pervading spirit.
SANSKRIT

karma brahmodbhavam viddhi
brahmâksara-samudbhavam
tasmât sarva-gatam brahma
nityam yajne pratisthitam
WORD FOR WORD
karma -- work; brahma -- from the Vedas; udbhavam -- produced; viddhi -- you should know; brahma -the Vedas; aksara -- from the Supreme Brahman (Personality of Godhead); samudbhavam -- directly
manifested; tasmat -- therefore; sarva-gatam -- all-pervading; brahma -- transcendence; nityam -eternally; yajne -- in sacrifice; pratisthitam -- situated.
TRANSLATION
Regulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are directly manifested from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Consequently the all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated in acts of
sacrifice.
Text 16
Therefore it is so that one who in his life does not adopt this regular [cakra] order as established in the
Vedas - will lead a useless life full of sin and sense-gratification.
SANSKRIT

Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

evam pravartitam cakram
nânuvartayatîha yah
aghâyur indriyârâmo
mogham pârtha sa jîvati
…Page 5 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
evam -- thus; pravartitam -- established by the Vedas; cakram -- cycle; na -- does not; anuvartayati -adopt; iha -- in this life; yah -- one who; agha-ayuh -- whose life is full of sins; indriya-aramah -- satisfied
in sense gratification; mogham -- uselessly; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ(Arjuna); sah -- he; jivati -- lives.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, one who does not follow in human life the cycle of sacrifice thus established by the Vedas
certainly leads a life full of sin. Living only for the satisfaction of the senses, such a person lives in vain.
Text 17
But one who takes pleasure in the soul surely remains a self-realized man contented in himself only and
freed from obligations.
SANSKRIT

yas tv âtma-ratir eva syâd
âtma-trptas ca mânavah
âtmany eva ca santustas
tasya kâryam na vidyate

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- one who; tu -- but; atma-ratih -- taking pleasure in the self; eva -- certainly; syat -- remains; atmatrptah -- self-illuminated; ca -- and; manavah -- a man; atmani -- in himself; eva -- only; ca -- and;
santustah -- perfectly satiated; tasya -- his; karyam -- duty; na -- does not; vidyate -- exist.
TRANSLATION
But for one who takes pleasure in the self, whose human life is one of self-realization, and who is satisfied
in the self only, fully satiated -- for him there is no duty.
Text 18
Certainly never his doing or not doing in this world will be for a material purpose and never will he see any
advantage in taking to the shelter of other living beings.
SANSKRIT

naiva tasya krtenârtho
nâkrteneha kascana
na câsya sarva-bhûtesu
kascid artha-vyapâsrayah
WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; eva -- certainly; tasya -- his; krtena -- by discharge of duty; arthah -- purpose; na -- nor;
akrtena -- without discharge of duty; iha -- in this world; kascana -- whatever; na -- never; ca --and; asya - of him; sarva-bhutesu -- among all living beings; kascit -- any; artha -- purpose; vyapasrayah -- taking
shelter of.
TRANSLATION
A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his prescribed duties, nor has he any
reason not to perform such work. Nor has he any need to depend on any other living being.
Text 19
Therefore, do your work constantly without attachment as a duty, because performing labor unattached
certainly one will achieve the Original Person.
SANSKRIT

tasmâd asaktah satatam
kâryam karma samâcara
asakto hy âcaran karma
param âpnoti pûrusah

WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; asaktah -- without attachment; satatam - constantly; karyam -- as duty; karma -work; samacara -- perform; asaktah -- unattached; hi -- certainly; acaran -- performing; karma -- work;
param -- the Supreme; apnoti -- achieves; purusah -- a man.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act as a matter of duty, for by
working without attachment one attains the Supreme.
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 6 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 20
For sure even kings like Janaka [father of Sîtâ, the wife of Râma,] and others attained to perfection
through this work and also in consideration of what the world needs you should act.
SANSKRIT

karmanaiva hi samsiddhim
âsthitâ janakâdayah
loka-sangraham evâpi
sampasyan kartum arhasi

WORD FOR WORD
karmana -- by work; eva -- even; hi -- certainly; samsiddhim -- in perfection; asthitah -- situated; janakaadayah -- Janaka and other kings; loka-sangraham -- the people in general; eva api -- also; sampasyan -considering; kartum -- to act; arhasi -- you deserve.
TRANSLATION
Kings such as Janaka attained perfection solely by performance of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for
the sake of educating the people in general, you should perform your work.
Text 21
Whatever that a respectable leader does is surely and solely done for other people and whatever the
example he gives the whole world will do in following.
SANSKRIT

yad yad âcarati sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah
sa yat pramânam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
WORD FOR WORD
yat yat -- whatever; acarati -- he does; sresthah -- a respectable leader; tat -- that; tat -- and that alone;
eva -- certainly; itarah -- common; janah -- person; sah -- he; yat -- whichever; pramanam -- example;
kurute -- does perform; lokah -- all the world; tat -- that; anuvartate -- follows in the footsteps.
TRANSLATION
Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And whatever standards he sets by
exemplary acts, all the world pursues.
Text 22
For Me there is no obligation of service in the three worlds [heaven, hell and purgatory] yet, indeed
without wanting or desire to obtain, I am engaged in activities also.
SANSKRIT

na me pârthasti kartavyam
trisu lokesu kincana
nanavâptam avâptavyam
varta eva ca karmani

WORD FOR WORD
na -- not; me -- Mine; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; asti -- there is; kartavyam -- prescribed duty; trisu -- in the
three; lokesu -- planetary systems; kincana -- any; na -- nothing; anavaptam -- wanted; avaptavyam -- to
be gained; varte -- I am engaged; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; karmani -- in prescribed duty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three planetary systems. Nor am I in
want of anything, nor have I a need to obtain anything -- and yet I am engaged in prescribed duties.
Text 23
Surely if I ever fail thus to be engaged with great care, that path of mine all men would follow, o son of
Prithâ, in every respect.
SANSKRIT

yadi hy aham na varteyam
jâtu karmany atandritah
mama vartmânuvartante
manusyâh pârtha sarvasah

Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 7 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yadi -- if; hi -- certainly; aham -- I; na -- do not; varteyam -- thus engage; jatu -- ever; karmani -- in the
performance of prescribed duties; atandritah -- with great care; mama -- My; vartma -- path; anuvartante
-- would follow; manusyah -- all men; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; sarvasah -- in all respects.
TRANSLATION
For if I ever failed to engage in carefully performing prescribed duties, O Prithâ, certainly all men would
follow My path.
Text 24
All these worlds would run into chaos if I wouldn't do My work; I would create confusion and would destroy
all these living entities.
SANSKRIT

utsîdeyur ime lokâ
na kuryâm karma ced aham
sankarasya ca kartâ syâm
upahanyâm imâh prajâh

WORD FOR WORD
utsideyuh -- would be put into ruin; ime -- all these; lokah -- worlds; na -- not; kuryam -- I perform; karma
-- prescribed duties; cet -- if; aham -- I; sankarasya -- of unwanted population; ca -- and; karta -- creator;
syam -- would be; upahanyam -- would destroy; imah -- all these; prajah -- living entities.
TRANSLATION
If I did not perform prescribed duties, all these worlds would be put to ruination. I would be the cause of
creating unwanted population, and I would thereby destroy the peace of all living beings.
Text 25
As the ignorant do their work in attachment, o descendant of Bharata, so the learned must act without
attachment in desiring to be the example for the common people.
SANSKRIT

saktâh karmany avidvâmso
yathâ kurvanti bhârata
kuryâd vidvâms tathâsaktas
cikîrsur loka-sangraham

WORD FOR WORD
saktah -- being attached; karmani -- in prescribed duties; avidvamsah -- the ignorant; yatha -- as much as;
kurvanti -- they do; bharata -- O descendant of Bharata; kuryat -- must do; vidvan -- the learned; tatha -thus; asaktah -- without attachment; cikirsuh -- desiring to lead; loka-sangraham -- the people in general.
TRANSLATION
As the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results, the learned may similarly act, but
without attachment, for the sake of leading people on the right path.
Text 26
He should not disturb the minds of the ignorant attached to the fruits of labor; a wise man should,
engaged in his duty, fit all in with his work.
SANSKRIT

na buddhi-bhedam janayed
ajnânâm karma-sanginâm
josayet sarva-karmâni
vidvân yuktah samâcaran

WORD FOR WORD
na -- not; buddhi-bhedam -- disruption of intelligence; janayet -- he should cause; ajñânam -- of the
foolish; karma-sanginam -- who are attached to fruitive work; josayet -- he should dovetail; sarva -- all;
karmani -- work; vidvan -- a learned person; yuktah -- engaged; samacaran -- practicing.
TRANSLATION
So as not to disrupt the minds of ignorant men attached to the fruitive results of prescribed duties, a
learned person should not induce them to stop work. Rather, by working in the spirit of devotion, he
should engage them in all sorts of activities [for the gradual development of Krishna consciousness].
Text 27
From all kinds of activities performed by the modes of material nature, the self, bewildered by the
identification with the physical, thinks itself thus the doer.
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 8 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

prakrteh kriyamânâni
gunaih karmâni sarvasah
ahankâra- vimûdhâtmâ
kartâham iti manyate

WORD FOR WORD
prakrteh -- of material nature; kriyamanani -- being done; gunaih -- by the modes; karmani -- activities;
sarvasah -- all kinds of; ahankara-vimudha -- bewildered by false ego; atma -- the spirit soul; karta -doer; aham -- I; iti -- thus; manyate -- he thinks.
TRANSLATION
The spirit soul bewildered by the influence of false ego thinks himself the doer of activities that are in
actuality carried out by the three modes of material nature.
Text 28
But knowing the principle reality [tattva] with the operating modes, o mighty armed one, will he, who
thinks that way about the difference between the senses and their engagement, never become attached.
SANSKRIT

tattva-vit tu mahâ-bâho
guna-karma- vibhâgayoh
gunâ gunesu vartanta
iti matvâ na sajjate
WORD FOR WORD
tattva-vit -- the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu -- but; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; guna-karma -of works under material influence; vibhagayoh--differences; gunah--senses; gunesu--in sensegratification;
vartante -- are being engaged; iti -- thus; matva -- thinking; na -- never; sajjate -- becomes attached.
TRANSLATION
One who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not engage himself in the senses
and sense gratification, knowing well the differences between work in devotion and work for fruitive
results.
Text 29
Bewildered by the modes of nature those persons who have little knowledge and who are lax in
selfrealization,become entangled in material activities; they should not be agitated by the ones who
know.
SANSKRIT

prakrter guna-sammûdhâh
sajjante guna-karmasu
tân akrtsna-vido mandân
krtsna-vin na vicâlayet
WORD FOR WORD
prakrteh -- of material nature; guna -- by the modes; sammudhah -- befooled by material identification;
sajjante -- they become engaged; guna-karmasu -- in material activities; tan -- those; akrtsna-vidah -persons with a poor fund of knowledge; mandan -- lazy to understand self-realization; krtsna-vit -- one
who is in factual knowledge; na -- not; vicalayet -- should try to agitate.
TRANSLATION
Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage themselves in material activities
and become attached. But the wise should not unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to
the performers' lack of knowledge.
Text 30
Therefore dedicate all sorts of work to Me, giving up in the full knowledge of your soul, with a
consciousness free from desiring profit and property and being thus: fight without hesitation!
SANSKRIT

mayi sarvâni karmâni
sannyâsyâdhyâtma-cetasâ
nirâsîr nirmamo bhûtvâ
yudhyasva vigata-jvarah

WORD FOR WORD
mayi -- unto Me; sarvani -- all sorts of; karmani -- activities; sannyâsya -- giving up completely; adhyatma
-- with full knowledge of the self; cetasa -- by consciousness; nirasih -- without desire for profit;
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 9 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
nirmamah -- without ownership; bhutva -- so being; yudhyasva -- fight; vigata-jvarah -- without being
lethargic.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, with full knowledge of Me, without desires for
profit, with no claims to proprietorship, and free from lethargy, fight.
Text 31
Those who follow these directions about the eternal in a regulated manner are human beings with faith
and devotion not looking at others; all of them will become free from even the bond of fruitive labor.
SANSKRIT

ye me matam idam nityam
anutisthanti mânavâh
sraddhâvanto 'nasûyanto
mucyante te 'pi karmabhih
WORD FOR WORD
ye -- those who; me -- My; matam -- injunctions; idam -- these; nityam -- as an eternal function;
anutisthanti -- execute regularly; manavah -- human beings; sraddha-vantah -- with faith and devotion;
anasuyantah -- without envy; mucyante -- become free; te -- all of them; api -- even; karmabhih -- from
the bondage of the law of fruitive actions.
TRANSLATION
Those persons who execute their duties according to My injunctions and who follow this teaching
faithfully, without envy, become free from the bondage of fruitive actions.
Text 32
But those however who do not regularly follow my instructions out of envy are confused about all
knowledge and know them well as being ruined without that servitude.
SANSKRIT

ye tv etad abhyasûyanto
nânutisthanti me matam
sarva-jnâna-vimûdhâms tân
viddhi nastân acetasah
WORD FOR WORD
ye--those; tu--however; etat--this; abhyasuyantah--out of envy; na--do not; anutisthanti--regularly
perform; me--My; matam--injunction; sarva-jñâna--in all sorts of knowledge; vimudhan--perfectly
befooled; tan--they are; viddhi--know it well; nastan--all ruined; acetasah--without Krishna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
But those who, out of envy, disregard these teachings and do not follow them are to be considered bereft
of all knowledge, befooled, and ruined in their endeavors for perfection.
Text 33
The learned one tries according his own way [to relate to] the modes of nature, nevertheless all living
beings are subjected to it [the creation, maintenance and destruction ] - what then can one expect from
defeat and destruction ?
SANSKRIT

sadrsam cestate svasyâh
prakrter jnânavân api
prakritim yânti bhûtâni
nigrahah kim karisyati
WORD FOR WORD
sadrsam--accordingly; cestate--tries; svasyah--by his own; prakrteh--modes of nature; jñâna-van--learned;
api--although; prakritim--nature; yanti--undergo; bhutani--all living entities; nigrahah--repression; kim-what; karisyati--can do.
TRANSLATION
Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone follows the nature he has
acquired from the three modes. What can repression accomplish?
Text 34
The attachment and aversion of the senses to their objects needs to be regulated as one certainly should
never come under the control of those stumbling blocks.
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 10 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

indriyasyendriyasyârthe
râga-dvesau vyavasthitau
tayor na vasam âgacchet
tau hy asya paripanthinau
WORD FOR WORD
indriyasya--of the senses; indriyasya arthe--in the sense objects; raga--attachment; dvesau--also
detachment; vyavasthitau--put under regulations; tayoh--of them; na--never; vasam--control; agacchet-one should come; tau--those; hi--certainly; asya--his; paripanthinau--stumbling blocks.
TRANSLATION
There are principles to regulate attachment and aversion pertaining to the senses and their objects. One
should not come under the control of such attachment and aversion, because they are stumbling blocks on
the path of self-realization.
Text 35
It is better [to that] to follow one's own nature making mistakes than to be perfect in following an
estranged course of action; to find destruction with following one's own duty is [thus] better than to run
with an estranged sense of duty into danger.
SANSKRIT

sreyân sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmât sv-anusthitât
sva-dharme nidhanam sreyah
para-dharmo bhayâvahah

WORD FOR WORD
sreyan--far better; sva-dharmah--one's prescribed duties; vigunah--even faulty; para-dharmat--than duties
mentioned for others; su-anusthitat--perfectly done; sva-dharme--in one's prescribed duties; nidhanam-destruction; sreyah--better; para-dharmah--duties prescribed for others; bhaya-avahah--dangerous.
TRANSLATION
It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though faultily, than another's duties perfectly.
Destruction in the course of performing one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duties, for to
follow another's path is dangerous.
Text 36
Ajuna said:'Then by what is a man impelled to sin even if he doesn't want to, o descendant of Vrishni
[Krishna's family name], as if engaged by force?
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
atha kena prayukto 'yam
pâpam carati pûrusah
anicchann api vârsneya
balâd iva ni yojitah

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; atha -- then; kena -- by what; prayuktah -- impelled; ayam -- one; papam -sins; carati -- does; purusah -- a man; anicchan -- without desiring; api -- although; varsneya -- O
descendant of Vrsni; balat -- by force; iva -- as if; niyojitah -- engaged.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O descendant of Vrsni, by what is one impelled to sinful acts, even unwillingly, as if engaged
by force?
Text 37
The Supreme Lord said:' It is lust, it is anger born from the mode of passion which is the all-devouring
greatly sinful; know this here to be your greatest enemy.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
kâma esa krodha esa
rajo-guna-samudbhavah
mahâ-sano mahâ-pâpmâ
viddhy enam iha vairinam
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 11 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Personality of Godhead said; kamah -- lust; mesah -- this; krodhah -- wrath; esah
-- this; rajah-guna -- the mode of passion; samudbhavah -- born of; maha-asanah -- all-devouring; mahapapma -- greatly sinful; viddhi -- know; enam -- this; iha -- in the material world; vairinam -- greatest
enemy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of contact with the
material mode of passion and later transformed into wrath, and which is the all-devouring sinful enemy of
this world.
Text 38
Just like smoke covering a fire, a mirror covered with dust and a womb enclosing an embryo, so similarly
by this lust this [knowing] is covered.
SANSKRIT

dhûmenâvriyate vahnir
yathâdarso malena ca
yatholbenâvrto garbhas
tathâ tenedam âvrtam
WORD FOR WORD
dhumena -- by smoke; avriyate -- is covered; vahnih -- fire; yatha -- just as; adarsah -- mirror; malena -by dust; ca -- also; yatha- just as; ulbena -- by the womb; avrtah -- is covered; garbhah -- embryo; tatha -so; tena -- by that lust; idam -- this; avrtam -- is covered.
TRANSLATION
As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the embryo is covered by the womb, the
living entity is similarly covered by different degrees of this lust.
Text 39
The knowing of the knower, covered by this eternal enemy in the form of [the unregulated] desire , o son
of Kuntî, is just like fire never satisfied.
SANSKRIT

âvrtam jnânam etena
jnânino nitya-vairinâ
kâma-rûpena kaunteya
duspûrenânalena ca
WORD FOR WORD
avrtam -- covered; jñânam -- pure consciousness; etena -- by this; jnaninah -- of the knower; nitya-vairina
-- by the eternal enemy; kama-rupena -- in the form of lust; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; duspurena -never to be satisfied; analena -- by the fire; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
Thus the wise living entity's pure consciousness becomes covered by his eternal enemy in the form of lust,
which is never satisfied and which burns like fire.
Text 40
The senses, the mind and the intelligence are called the stronghold of this lust which by all these clouds
the knowledge in covering the embodied [soul].
SANSKRIT

indriyâni mano buddhir
asyâdhisthânam ucyate
etair vimohayaty esa
jnânam âvrtya dehinam

WORD FOR WORD
indriyani -- the senses; manah -- the mind; buddhih -- the intelligence; asya -- of this lust; adhisthanam -sitting place; ucyate -- is called; etaih -- by all these; vimohayati -- bewilders; esah -- this lust; jñânam -knowledge; avrt ya -- covering; dehinam -- of the embodied.
TRANSLATION
The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of this lust. Through them lust covers the
real knowledge of the living entity and bewilders him.
Text 41
Therefore you must, regulating the senses from the beginning, o best among the Bhâratas, curb this drive
of sin that is the destroyer of knowledge and wisdom.
Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 12 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

tasmât tvam indriyâny âdau
niyamya bharatarsabha
pâpmânam prajahi hy enam
jnâna-vijnâna-nâsanam
WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; tvam -- you; indriyani -- senses; adau -- in the beginning; niyamya -- by regulating;
bharata-rsabha -- O chief amongst the descendants of Bharata; papmanam -- the great symbol of sin;
prajahi -- curb; hi -- certainly; enam -- this; jñâna -- of knowledge; vijñâna -- and scientific knowledge of
the pure soul; nasanam -- the destroyer.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bhâratas, in the very beginning curb this great symbol of sin [lust] by
regulating the senses, and slay this destroyer of knowledge and self-realization.
Text 42
The senses are above things one says and more than the senses is the superior [directing] mind. Also above
that is the [planning] intelligence - but more than the intelligence is He who is the [controlling
transcendent soul] beyond.
SANSKRIT

indriyâni parâny âhur
indriyebhyah param manah
manasas tu parâ buddhir
yo buddheh paratas tu sah
WORD FOR WORD
indriyani -- senses; parani -- superior; ahuh -- are said; indriyebhyah -- more than the senses; param -superior; manah -- the mind; manasah -- more than the mind; tu -- also; para -- superior; buddhih -intelligence; yah -- who; buddheh -- more than the intelligence; paratah -- superior; tu -- but; sah -- he.
TRANSLATION
The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the senses; intelligence is still higher
than the mind; and he [the soul] is even higher than the intelligence.
Text 43
Thus superior to the intelligence knowing from the steadying of the mind deliberately conquer this enemy
which, o mighty armed one, is so formidable in the form of lust.
SANSKRIT

evam buddheh param buddhvâ
samstabhyâtmânam âtmanâ
jahi satrum mahâ-bâho
kâma-rûpam durâsadam

WORD FOR WORD
evam -- thus; buddheh -- to intelligence; param -- superior; buddhva --knowing; samstabhya -- by
steadying; atmanam -- the mind; atmana -- by deliberate intelligence; jahi -- conquer; satrum -- the
enemy; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; kama-rupam -- in the form of lust; durasadam -- formidable.
TRANSLATION
Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to the material senses, mind and intelligence, O mighty-armed
Arjuna, one should steady the mind by deliberate spiritual intelligence [Krishna consciousness] and thus -by spiritual strength -- conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust.

Chapter 3 - The Yoga of Action

…Page 13 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 4

The Yoga of Knowledge

About sacrificing and the importance of knowledge
Text 1
The Supreme Lord said: 'This imperishable yoga I instructed to the sun-god [Vivasvan] who told it to the
father of mankind [Vaivasvata Manu] who in his turn spoke it to Iksvaku [founder of the dynasty where
Râma descended in].
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
imam vivasvate yogam
proktavân aham avyayam
vivasvân manave prâha
manur iksvâkave 'bravît

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam -- this; vivasvate -- unto the sungod; yogam -- the science of one's relationship to the Supreme; proktavan -- instructed; aham -- I;
avyayam -- imperishable; vivasvan -- Vivasvan (the sun-god's name); manave -- unto the father of mankind
(of the name Vaivasvata); praha -- told; manuh -- the father of mankind; iksvakave -- unto King Iksvaku;
abravit -- said.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Lord S'rî Krishna, said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the
sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed
it to Iksvaku.
Text 2
Thus one following the other, the saintly kings received this science understanding it that way but in the
course of time in this world this great way of connecting oneself was scattered, o subduer of the enemies.
SANSKRIT

evam paramparâ-prâptam
imam râjarsayo viduh
sa kâleneha mahatâ
yogo nastah parantapa

WORD FOR WORD
evam -- thus; parampara -- by disciplic succession; praptam -- received; imam -- this science; raja-rsayah - the saintly kings; viduh-- understood; sah -- that knowledge; kalena -- in the course of time; iha -- in this
world; mahata -- great; yogah -- the science of one's relationship with the Supreme; nastah -- scattered;
parantapa -- O Arjuna, subduer of the enemies.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 1 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings
understood it in that way. But in course of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it
is appears to be lost.
Text 3
This very same very old science of yoga today is spoken by Me to you as you are My devotee and friend as
well and thus factually [you can come to understand] the mystery of this transcendence.
SANSKRIT

sa evâyam mayâ te 'dya
yogah proktah purâtanah
bhakto 'si me sakhâ ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam

WORD FOR WORD
sah -- the same; eva -- certainly; ayam -- this; maya -- by Me; te --unto you; adya -- today; yogah -- the
science of yoga; proktah -- spoken; puratanah -- very old; bhaktah -- devotee; asi -- you are; me -- My;
sakha -- friend; ca -- also; iti -- therefore; rahasyam --mystery; hi -- certainly; etat -- this; uttamam -transcendental.
TRANSLATION
That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today told by Me to you because you are
My devotee as well as My friend and can therefore understand the transcendental mystery of this science.
Text 4
Arjuna said: 'Your birth came after the one before of Vivasvan. How must I understand Your instructing in
the beginning thus?'
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
aparam bhavato janma
param janma vivasvatah
katham etad vijânîyâm
tvam âdau proktavân iti

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; aparam- junior; bhavatah -- Your; janma -- birth; param -- superior; janma -birth; vivasvatah -- of the sun-god; katham -- how; etat -- this; vijaniyam -- shall I understand; tvam -You; adau -- in the beginning; proktavan -- instructed; iti -- thus.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvan is senior by birth to You. How am I to understand that in the beginning
You instructed this science to him?
Text 5
The Supreme Lord said: ' Many births of Mine and also of you have passed, o Arjuna, I know them all but
you do not, o subduer of the enemy.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
bahûni me vyatîtâni
janmâni tava cârjuna
tâny aham veda sarvâni
na tvam vettha parantapa
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Personality of Godhead said; bahuni -- many; me -- of Mine; vyatitani -- have
passed; janmani -- births; tava -- of yours; ca -- and also; arjuna -- O Arjuna; tani -- those; aham -- I; veda
-- do know; sarvani -- all; na -- not; tvam -- you; vettha -- know; parantapa -- O subduer of the enemy.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I can remember all of
them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!
Text 6
Despite of being unborn by nature, the imperishable soul and the Lord of all living beings, I, although
situated in transcendence, out of My own do incarnate as the [deluding] covering of My own Self.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 2 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

ajo 'pi sann avyayâtmâ
bhûtânâm îsvaro 'pi san
prakritim svâm adhisthâya
sambhavâmy âtma-mâyayâ

WORD FOR WORD
ajah -- unborn; api -- although; san -- being so; avyaya -- without deterioration; atma -- body; bhutanam - of all those who are born; isvarah -- the Supreme Lord; api -- although; san -- being so; prakritim -- in
the transcendental form; svam -- of Myself; adhisthaya -- being so situated; sambhavami -- I do incarnate;
atma-mayaya -- by My internal energy.
TRANSLATION
Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and although I am the Lord of all
living entities, I still appear in every millennium in My original transcendental form.
Text 7
Whenever and wherever it is sure that one weakens in righteousness and a predominance of injustice does
manifest, o descendant of Bharata, at that time I do manifest Myself.
SANSKRIT

yadâ yadâ hi dharmasya
glânir bhavati bhârata
abhyutthânam adharmasya
tadâtmânam srjâmy aham

WORD FOR WORD
yada yada -- whenever and wherever; hi -- certainly; dharmasya -- of religion; glanih -- discrepancies;
bhavati -- become manifested; bharata -- O descendant of Bharata; abhyutthanam -- predominance;
adharmasya -- of irreligion; tada -- at that time; atmanam -- self; srjami -- manifest; aham -- I.
TRANSLATION
Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a
predominant rise of irreligion -- at that time I descend Myself.
Text 8
To liberate the seekers of truth, to take the power away from the wicked ones and to reestablish the way
of the human principles I do appear age after age.
SANSKRIT

paritrânâya sâdhûnâm
vinâsâya ca duskrtâm
dharma-samsthâpanârthâya
sambhavâmi yuge yuge
WORD FOR WORD
paritranaya -- for the deliverance; sadhunam -- of the devotees; vinasaya -- for the annihilation; ca -- and;
duskrtam -- of the miscreants; dharma -- principles of religion; samsthapana-arthaya -- to reestablish;
sambhavami -- I do appear; yuge -- millennium; yuge -- after millennium.
TRANSLATION
To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I
Myself appear, millennium after millennium.
Text 9
Anyone who knows as such of my divine birth(s) and activities will never, after leaving his body, take birth
again, but will attain Me, O Arjuna.
SANSKRIT

janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktvâ deham punar janma
naiti mâm eti so 'rjuna

WORD FOR WORD
janma -- birth; karma -- work; ca -- also; me -- of Mine; divyam -- transcendental; evam -- like this; yah -anyone who; vetti -- knows; tattvatah -- in reality; tyaktva -- leaving aside; deham -- this body; punah -again; janma -- birth; na -- never; eti -- does attain; mam -- unto Me; eti -- does attain; sah -- he; arjuna - O Arjuna.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 3 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the
body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.
Text 10
Freed from attachment, fear and anger in the full awareness of Me, many who were purified in the
knowledge of penance, have attained My transcendental love.
SANSKRIT

vîta-râga-bhaya-krodha
man-mayâ mâm upâsritâh
bahavo jnâna-tapasâ
pûtâ mad-bhâvam âgatâh

WORD FOR WORD
vita -- freed from; raga -- attachment; bhaya -- fear; krodhah -- and anger; mat-maya -- fully in Me; mam
-- in Me; upasritah -- being fully situated; bahavah -- many; jñâna -- of knowledge; tapasa -- by the
penance; putah -- being purified; mat-bhavam -- transcendental love for Me; agatah -- attained.
TRANSLATION
Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me and taking refuge in Me, many,
many persons in the past became purified by knowledge of Me -- and thus they all attained transcendental
love for Me.
Text 11
All who surrender themselves to Me I surely award My path [of glory] that is followed by all men, o son of
Prithâ, in all respects.
SANSKRIT

ye yathâ mâm prapadyante
tâms tathaiva bhajâmy aham
mama vartmânuvartante
manusyâh pârtha sarvasah

WORD FOR WORD
ye -- all who; yatha -- as; mam -- unto Me; prapadyante -- surrender; tan -- them; tatha -- so; eva -certainly; bhajami -- reward; aham -- I; mama -- My; vartma -- path; anuvartante -- follow; manusyah -all men; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; sarvasah -- in all respects.
TRANSLATION
As all surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of
Prithâ.
Text 12
Desiring the perfect of the profit they worship the gods here and certainly in the worldly society success
will quickly ensue of that fruitive labor.
SANSKRIT

kânksantah karmanâm siddhim
yajanta iha devatâh
ksipram hi mânuse loke
siddhir bhavati karmajâ

WORD FOR WORD
kanksantah -- desiring; karmanam -- of fruitive activities; siddhim -- perfection; yajante -- they worship by
sacrifices; iha -- in the material world; devatah -- the demigods; ksipram -- very quickly; hi -- certainly;
manuse -- in human society; loke -- within this world; siddhih -- success; bhavati -- comes; karma-ja -from fruitive work.
TRANSLATION
Men in this world desire success in fruitive activities, and therefore they worship the demigods. Quickly,
of course, men get results from fruitive work in this world.
Text 13
Of the four vocations [of labor, trading , ruling and guiding] accomplished by Me according the qualities
[of goodness, passion and slowness] and the divisions of labor [according the status of youngsters,
married, withdrawn and retired people and their level of transcendence] I am the Father, although you
may know Me as the nondoer and unchangeable.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 4 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

câtur-varnyam mayâ srstam
guna-karma-vibhâgasah
tasya kartâram api mâm
viddhy akartâram avyayam
WORD FOR WORD
catuh-varnyam -- the four divisions of human society; maya -- by Me; srstam -- created; guna -- of quality;
karma -- and work; vibhagasah -- in terms of division; tasya -- of that; kartaram -- the father; api -although; mam -- Me; viddhi -- you may know; akartaram -- as the nondoer; avyayam -- unchangeable.
TRANSLATION
According to the three modes of material nature and the work associated with them, the four divisions of
human society are created by Me. And although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am
yet the nondoer, being unchangeable.
Text 14
Doing work does not affect Me as I do not aspire the fruits thereof. Therefore one who knows Me will, of
labor, never become entangled.
SANSKRIT

na mâm karmâni limpanti
na me karma-phale sprhâ
iti mâm yo 'bhijânâti
karmabhir na sa badhyate

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; mam -- Me; karmani -- all kinds of work; limpanti -- do affect; na -- nor; me -- My; karmaphale -- in fruitive action; sprha -- aspiration; iti -- thus; mam -- Me; yah -- one who; abhijanati -- does
know; karmabhih -- by the reaction of such work; na -- never; sah -- he; badhyate -- becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
There is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of action. One who understands this truth
about Me also does not become entangled in the fruitive reactions of work.
Text 15
Knowing this the ancients who attained liberation surely knew to keep to their duty and therefore you
should act the way your predecessors did in the past.
SANSKRIT

evam jnâtvâ krtam karma
pûrvair api mumuksubhih
kuru karmaiva tasmât tvam
pûrvaih pûrvataram krtam
WORD FOR WORD
evam -- thus; jnatva -- knowing well; krtam -- was performed; karma --work; purvaih -- by past
authorities; api -- indeed; mumuksubhih -- who attained liberation; kuru -- just perform; karma -prescribed duty; eva -- certainly; tasmat -- therefore; tvam -- you; purvaih -- by the predecessors; purvataram -- in ancient times; krtam -- as performed.
TRANSLATION
All the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding of My transcendental nature.
Therefore you should perform your duty following in their footsteps.
Text 16
What is action and what is inaction? Even the intelligent are in illusion about this matter. That I will now
explain to you and knowing it you will be liberated from ill fortune.
SANSKRIT

kim karma kim akarmeti
kavayo 'py atra mohitâh
tat te karma pravaksyâmi
yaj jnâtvâ moksyase 'subhât

WORD FOR WORD
kim -- what is; karma -- action; kim -- what is; akarma -- inaction; iti -- thus; kavayah -- the intelligent;
api -- also; atra -- in this matter; mohitah -- are bewildered; tat -- that; te -- unto you; karma -- work;
pravaksyami -- I shall explain; yat -- which; jnatva -- knowing; moksyase -- you will be liberated; asubhat - from ill fortune.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 5 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and what is inaction. Now I shall explain
to you what action is, knowing which you shall be liberated from all misfortune.
Text 17
Working in desiring the fruits [karma], unwanted work [vikarma] and work as a sacrifice [akarma] should
each be considered intelligently as it is difficult to understand the goal of karma.
SANSKRIT

karmano hy api boddhavyam
boddhavyam ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyam
gahanâ karmano gatih
WORD FOR WORD
karmanah -- of work; hi -- certainly; api -- also; boddhavyam -- should be understood; boddhavyam -should be understood; ca -- also; vikarmanah -- of forbidden work; akarmanah -- of inaction; ca -- also;
boddhavyam -- should be understood; gahana -- very difficult; karmanah -- of work; gatih -- entrance.
TRANSLATION
The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one should know properly what action is,
what forbidden action is, and what inaction is.
Text 18
One who sees labor for profit as inactivity and who sees work as a sacrifice as labor is intelligent in human
affairs; he, although engaged in all sorts of action is of the transcendental.
SANSKRIT

karmany akarma yah pasyed
akarmani ca karma yah
sa buddhimân manusyesu
sa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt
WORD FOR WORD
karmani -- in action; akarma -- inaction; yah -- one who; pasyet -- observes; akarmani -- in inaction; ca -also; karma -- fruitive action; yah -- one who; sah -- he; buddhi-man -- is intelligent; manusyesu -- in
human society; sah -- he; yuktah -- is in the transcendental position; krtsna-karma-krt -- although engaged
in all activities.
TRANSLATION
One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent among men, and he is in the
transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of activities.
Text 19
The karma of him who of determination tries with everything without desiring, is burned up by the fire of
knowledge, the learned declare who know about this.
SANSKRIT

yasya sarve samârambhâh
kâma-sankalpa- varjitâh
jnânâgni-dagdha-karmânam
tam âhuh panditam budhâh
WORD FOR WORD
yasya -- one whose; sarve -- all sorts of; samarambhah -- attempts; kama -- based on desire for sense
gratification; sankalpa -- determination; varjitah -- are devoid of; jñâna -- of perfect knowledge; agni -by the fire; dagdha -- burned; karmnanam -- whose work; tam -- him; ahuh -- declare; panditam -learned; budhah -- those who know.
TRANSLATION
One is understood to be in full knowledge whose every endeavor is devoid of desire for sense gratification.
He is said by sages to be a worker for whom the reactions of work have been burned up by the fire of
perfect knowledge.
Text 20
He who has given up to work for the attachment to the fruits, is always satisfied and free from clinging to
his home. He does, although fully active, not really do anything.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 6 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

tyaktvâ karma-phalâsangam
nitya-trpto nirâsrayah
karmany abhipravrtto 'pi
naiva kincit karoti sah

WORD FOR WORD
tyaktva -- having given up; karma-phala-asangam -- attachment for fruitive results; nitya -- always; trptah
-- being satisfied; nirasrayah -- without any shelter; karmani -- in activity; abhipravrttah -- being fully
engaged; api -- in spite of; na -- does not; eva -- certainly; kincit -- anything; karoti -- do; sah -- he.
TRANSLATION
Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever satisfied and independent, he performs no
fruitive action, although engaged in all kinds of undertakings.
Text 21
Not desiring, controlled in his conscious self and giving up all claims of property he keeps himself together
by doing work only, without ever running into the reactions of sin.
SANSKRIT

nirâsîr yata-cittâtmâ
tyakta-sarva-parigrahah
sârîram kevalam karma
kurvan nâpnoti kilbisam
WORD FOR WORD
nirasih -- without desire for the result; yata -- controlled; citta-atma -- mind and intelligence; tyakta -giving up; sarva -- all; parigrahah -- sense of proprietorship over possessions; sariram -- in keeping body
and soul together; kevalam -- only; karma -- work; kurvan -- doing; na -- never; apnoti -- does acquire;
kilbisam -- sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly controlled, gives up all sense of
proprietorship over his possessions, and acts only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not
affected by sinful reactions.
Text 22
Satisfied with gain coming on its own accord, free from the duality and envy and steady in success and
failure, he, although of action, never becomes entangled.
SANSKRIT

yadrcchâ-lâbha-santusto
dvandvâtîto vimatsarah
samah siddhâv asiddhau ca
krtvâpi na nibadhyate
WORD FOR WORD
yadrccha -- out of its own accord; labha -- with gain; santustah -- satisfied; dvandva -- duality; atitah -surpassed; vimatsarah -- free from envy; samah -- steady; siddhau -- in success; asiddhau -- failure; ca -also; krtva -- doing; api -- although; na -- never; nibadhyate -- becomes affected.
TRANSLATION
He who is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, who is free from duality and does not envy,
who is steady in both success and failure, is never entangled, although performing actions.
Text 23
With the attachment gone, being liberated and with the mind to the transcendent in the wisdom of acting
in sacrifice, the complete of karma dissolves.
SANSKRIT

gata-sangasya muktasya
jnânâvasthita-cetasah
yajnâyâcaratah karma
samagram pravilîyate

WORD FOR WORD
gata-sangasya -- of one unattached to the modes of material nature; muktasya -- of the liberated; jñânaavasthita -- situated in transcendence; cetasah -- whose wisdom; yajnaya -- for the sake of Yajna
(Krishna); acaratah -- acting; karma -- work; samagram -- in total; praviliyate -- merges entirely.

Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 7 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and who is fully situated in
transcendental knowledge merges entirely into transcendence.
Text 24

The sacrifice itself, that which is offered in the
fire of sacrifice and he who is of sacrifice are of
the same spiritual nature; he will certainly
attain the spirit of the Absolute [Brahman] who
is completely absorbed in working for the
spiritual.
SANSKRIT

brahmârpanam brahma havir
brahmâgnau brahmanâ hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyam
brahma-karma-samâdhinâ
WORD FOR WORD
brahma -- spiritual in nature; arpanam -contribution; brahma -- the Supreme; havih -butter; brahma -- spiritual; agnau -- in the fire
of consummation; brahmana -- by the spirit
soul; hutam -- offered; brahma -- spiritual
kingdom; eva -- certainly; tena -- by him;
gantavyam -- to be reached; brahma -- spiritual;
karma -- in activities; samadhina -- by complete
absorption.
TRANSLATION
A person who is fully absorbed in Krishna
consciousness is sure to attain the spiritual
kingdom because of his full contribution to
spiritual activities, in which the consummation
is absolute and that which is offered is of the
same spiritual nature.
Text 25
Some worship the godly in this while other followers of the path of yoga perfectly offer in sacrifice to the
fire of the spiritual itself.
SANSKRIT

daivam evâpare yajnam
yoginah paryupâsate
brahmâgnâu apare yajnam
yajnenaivopajuhvati

WORD FOR WORD
daivam -- in worshiping the demigods; eva -- like this; apare -- some others; yajnam -- sacrifices; yoginah - mystics; par yupasate -- worship perfectly; brahma -- of the Absolute Truth; agnau -- in the fire; apare -others; yajnam -- sacrifice; yajnena -- by sacrifice; eva -- thus; upajuhvati -- offer.
TRANSLATION
Some yogis perfectly worship the demigods by offering different sacrifices to them, and some of them
offer sacrifices in the fire of the Supreme Brahman.
Text 26
Some sacrifice by the hearing process to the senses in contemplating sound vibrations [like mantras] in the
fire, while others offer their sensegratification relating to material objects [like food] in the fire.
SANSKRIT

srotrâdînîndriyâny anye
samyamâgnisu juhvati
sabdâdîn visayân anya
indriyâgnisu juhvati
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 8 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
srotra-adini -- such as the hearing process; indriyani -- senses; anye -- others; samyama -- of restraint;
agnisu -- in the fires; juhvati --offer; sabda-adin -- sound vibration, etc.; visayan -- objects of sense
gratification; anye -- others; indriya -- of the sense organs; agnisu -- in the fires; juhvati -- they sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Some [the unadulterated brahmacaris] sacrifice the hearing process and the senses in the fire of mental
control, and others [the regulated householders] sacrifice the objects of the senses in the fire of the
senses.
Text 27
Still others in need of selfrealization too, offer in the fire of sacrifice of all functions of the senses, their
unregulated breath in the selfrestraint of yoga.
SANSKRIT

sarvânîndriya-karmâni
prâna-karmâni câpare
âtma-samyama-yogâgnau
juhvati jnâna-dîpite

WORD FOR WORD
sarvani -- of all; indriya -- the senses; karmani -- functions; prana-karmani -- functions of the life breath;
ca -- also; apare -- others; atma-samyama -- of controlling the mind; yoga -- the linking process; agnau -in the fire of; juhvati -- offer; jñâna-dipite -- because of the urge for self-realization.
TRANSLATION
Others, who are interested in achieving self-realization through control of the mind and senses, offer the
functions of all the senses, and of the life breath, as oblations into the fire of the controlled mind.
Text 28
Some sacrifice their possessions, in austerity and yoga thus while even others as ascetics haven taken to
strict vows, sacrifice their knowledge in the studying of the Vedas also.
SANSKRIT

dravya-yajnâs tapo-yajnâ
yoga-yajnâs tathâpare
svâdhyâya-jnâna-yajnâs ca
yatayah samsita-vratâh
WORD FOR WORD
dravya-yajnah -- sacrificing one's possessions; tapah-yajnah -- sacrifice in austerities; yoga-yajnah -sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tatha -- thus; apare -- others; svadhyaya -- sacrifice in the study of the
Vedas; jñâna-yajnah -- sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge; ca -- also; yatayah -enlightened persons; samsita-vratah -- taken to strict vows.
TRANSLATION
Having accepted strict vows, some become enlightened by sacrificing their possessions, and others by
performing severe austerities, by practicing the yoga of eightfold mysticism, or by studying the Vedas to
advance in transcendental knowledge.
Text 29
Offering the inward breath to the one going outward and the outward breath to the one going inward also
others are in effort to attain to cessation by [merely] following the inward and outward air while still
others sacrifice the inhaled air into itself in controlling their eating .
SANSKRIT

apâne juhvati prânam
prâne 'pânam tathâpare
prânâpâna-gatî ruddhvâ
prânâyâma-parâyanâh
apare niyatâhârâh
prânân prânesu juhvati

WORD FOR WORD
apane -- in the air which acts downward; juhvati -- offer; pranam -- the air which acts outward; prane -in the air going outward; apanam -- the air going downward; tatha -- as also; apare -- others; prana -- of
the air going outward; apana -- and the air going downward; gati -- the movement; ruddhva -- checking;
prana-ayama -- trance induced by stopping all breathing; parayanah -- so inclined; apare -- others; niyata
-- having controlled; aharah -- eating; pranan -- the outgoing air; pranesu -- in the outgoing air; juhvati -sacrifice.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 9 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Still others, who are inclined to the process of breath restraint to remain in trance, practice by offering
the movement of the outgoing breath into the incoming, and the incoming breath into the outgoing, and
thus at last remain in trance, stopping all breathing. Others, curtailing the eating process, offer the
outgoing breath into itself as a sacrifice.
Text 30
Although differing, all the ones knowing of sacrifice are purified of the reactions of their darkness and
having tasted the nectar as a result of those sacrifices, they reach the spirit of the eternal.
SANSKRIT

sarve 'py ete yajna-vido
yajna-ksapita-kalmasâh
yajna-sistâmrta-bhujo
yânti brahma sanâtanam
WORD FOR WORD
sarve -- all; api -- although apparently different; ete -- these; yajna-vidah -- conversant with the purpose
of performing sacrifices; yajna-ksapita -- being cleansed as the result of such performances; kalmasah -of sinful reactions; yajna-sista -- of the result of such performances of yajna; amrta-bhujah -- those who
have tasted such nectar; yanti -- do approach; brahma -- the supreme; sanatanam -- eternal atmosphere.
TRANSLATION
All these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed of sinful reactions, and, having
tasted the nectar of the results of sacrifices, they advance toward the supreme eternal atmosphere.
Text 31
When this world is not for the one without sacrifice, then what [to expect] of the next, o best of the
Kurus?
SANSKRIT

nâyam loko 'sty ayajnasya
kuto 'nyah kuru-sattama

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; ayam -- this; lokah -- planet; asti -- there is; ayajnasya -- for one who performs no sacrifice;
kutah -- where is; anyah -- the other; kuru-sat-tama -- O best amongst the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kuru dynasty, without sacrifice one can never live happily on this planet or in this life: what
then of the next?
Text 32
Thus the different types of sacrifices are defended by mouth of the Vedas. You must see them all as the
result of karma and knowing thus you will find liberation.
SANSKRIT

evam bahu-vidhâ yajnâ
vitatâ brahmano mukhe
karma-jân viddhi tân sarvân
evam jnâtvâ vimoksyase

WORD FOR WORD
evam -- thus; bahu-vidhah -- various kinds of; yajnah -- sacrifices; vitatah -- are spread; brahmanah -- of
the Vedas; mukhe -- through the mouth; karma-jan -- born of work; viddhi -- you should know; tan -them; sarvan -- all; evam -- thus; jnatva -- knowing; vimoksyase -- you will be liberated.
TRANSLATION
All these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and all of them are born of different
types of work. Knowing them as such, you will become liberated.
Text 33
Greater than the sacrifice of material things is the sacrifice of knowledge, o chastiser of the enemy; all
this karma in sum, O son of Prithâ, finds its end in knowledge.
SANSKRIT

sreyân dravyamayâd yajnâj
jnâna-yajnah parantapa
sarvam karmâkhilam pârtha
jnâne parisamâpyate
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 10 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
sreyan -- greater; dravya-mayat -- of material possessions; yajnat -- than the sacrifice; jñâna-yajnah -sacrifice in knowledge; parantapa -- O chastiser of the enemy; sarvam -- all; karma -- activities; akhilam -in totality; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; jnane -- in knowledge; parisamapyate -- end.
TRANSLATION
O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice performed in knowledge is better than the mere sacrifice of
material possessions. After all, O son of Prithâ, all sacrifices of work culminate in transcendental
knowledge.
Text 34
Try to understand that by exercising respect, inquiring submissively and rendering service to the ones who
know, as they will initiate you into the truth of the seers.
SANSKRIT

tad viddhi pranipâtena
pariprasnena sevayâ
upadeksyanti te jnânam
jnâninas tattva-darsinah

WORD FOR WORD
tat -- that knowledge of different sacrifices; viddhi -- try to understand; pranipatena -- by approaching a
spiritual master; pariprasnena -- by submissive inquiries; sevaya -- by the rendering of service;
upadeksyanti -- they will initiate; te -- you; jñânam -- into knowledge; jnaninah -- the self-realized; tattva
-- of the truth; darsinah -- seers.
TRANSLATION
Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render
service unto him. The self-realized souls can impart knowledge unto you because they have seen the
truth.
Text 35
Knowing it so you will never fall victim to illusion again as from this you will, O son of Prithâ, go for the
vision of the soul of all living beings, that is in Me.
SANSKRIT

yaj jnâtvâ na punar moham
evam yâsyasi pândava
yena bhutâny asesâni
draksyasy âtmany atho mayi

WORD FOR WORD
yat -- which; jnatva -- knowing; na -- never; punah -- again; moham -- to illusion; evam -- like this; yasyasi
-- you shall go; pandava -- O son of Pandu; yena -- by which; bhutani -- living entities; asesani -- all;
draksyasi -- you will see; atmani -- in the Supreme Soul; athau -- or in other words; mayi -- in Me.
TRANSLATION
Having obtained real knowledge from a self-realized soul, you will never fall again into such illusion, for
by this knowledge you will see that all living beings are but part of the Supreme, or, in other words, that
they are Mine.
Text 36
Even if you are the greatest of all sinners you will, with this boat of transcendental knowledge, cross the
ocean of all this misery.
SANSKRIT

api ced asi pâpebhyah
sarvebhyah pâpa-krttamah
sarvam jnâna-plavenaiva
vrjinam santarisyasi

WORD FOR WORD
api -- even; cet -- if; asi -- you are; papebhyah -- of sinners; sarvebhyah -- of all; papa-krt-tamah -- the
greatest sinner; sarvam -- all such sinful reactions; jñâna-plavena -- by the boat of transcendental
knowledge; eva -- certainly; vrjinam -- the ocean of miseries; santarisyasi -- you will cross completely.
TRANSLATION
Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when you are situated in the boat of
transcendental knowledge you will be able to cross over the ocean of miseries.
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 11 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 37
Like firewood ablaze with fire turns to ashes, O Arjuna, so the fire of knowledge turns all of your karma to
ashes.
SANSKRIT

yathaidhâmsi samiddho 'gnir
bhasmasât kurute 'rjuna
jnânâgnih sarva-karmâni
bhasmasât kurute tathâ
WORD FOR WORD
yatha- just as; edhamsi -- firewood; samiddhah -- blazing; agnih -- fire; bhasma-sat -- ashes; kurute -turns; arjuna -- O Arjuna; jñâna-agnih -- the fire of knowledge; sarva-karmani -- all reactions to material
activities; bhasma-sat -- to ashes; kurute -- it turns; tatha -- similarly.
TRANSLATION
As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire of knowledge burn to ashes all
reactions to material activities.
Text 38
Surely there exists nothing of knowledge in this world that can compare to this purification and he who is
mature in his own yoga will enjoy that in due course of time within himself.
SANSKRIT

na hi jnânena sadrsam
pavitram iha vidyate
tat svayam yoga-samsiddhah
kâlenâtmani vindati

WORD FOR WORD
na -- nothing; hi -- certainly; jnanena -- with knowledge; sadrsam -- in comparison; pavitram -- sanctified;
iha -- in this world; vidyate -- exists; tat -- that; svayam -- himself; yoga -- in devotion; samsiddhah -- he
who is mature; kalena -- in course of time; atmani -- in himself; vindati -- enjoys.
TRANSLATION
In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental knowledge. Such knowledge is the
mature fruit of all mysticism. And one who has become accomplished in the practice of devotional service
enjoys this knowledge within himself in due course of time.
Text 39
A man of faith can attain keeping close to the knowledge in the control of his senses as of that knowledge
having achieved the transcendental he very soon attains to peace.
SANSKRIT

sraddhâvâl labhate jnânam
tat-parah samyatendriyah
jnânam labdhvâ parâm sântim
acirenâdhigacchati

WORD FOR WORD
sraddha-van -- a faithful man; labhate -- achieves; jñânam -- knowledge; tat-parah -- very much attached
to it; samyata -- controlled; indriyah -- senses; jñânam -- knowledge; labdhva -- having achieved; param -transcendental; santim -- peace; acirena -- very soon; adhigacchati -- attains.
TRANSLATION
A faithful man who is dedicated to transcendental knowledge and who subdues his senses is eligible to
achieve such knowledge, and having achieved it he quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.
Text 40
But not knowing and also without belief a person of doubts has no taste for it; never in this world nor in
the beyond will there be happiness for such a doubtful soul.
SANSKRIT

ajnas câsraddadhânas ca
samsayâtmâ vinasyati
nâyam loko sti na paro
na sukham samsayâtmanah

WORD FOR WORD
ajnah -- a fool who has no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca -- and; asraddadhanah -- without faith in
revealed scriptures; ca -- also; samsaya -- of doubts; atma -- a person; vinasyati -- falls back; na -- never;
Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 12 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
ayam -- in this; lokah -- world; asti -- there is; na -- nor; parah -- in the next life; na -- not; sukham -happiness; samsaya -- doubtful; atmanah -- of the person.
TRANSLATION
But ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed scriptures do not attain God consciousness;
they fall down. For the doubting soul there is happiness neither in this world nor in the next.
Text 41
One who by yoga renounced materially motivated work and by means of knowledge broke with the doubt
is situated in the soul and will never be bound by his work, O conqueror of riches.
SANSKRIT

yoga-sannyâsta-karmânam
jnâna-sanchinna-samsayam
âtma-vantam na karmâni
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
WORD FOR WORD
yoga -- by devotional service in karma-yoga; sannyâsta -- one who has renounced; karmanam -- the fruits
of actions; jñâna -- by knowledge; sanchinna -- cut; samsayam -- doubts; atma-vantam -- situated in the
self; na -- never; karmani -- works; nibadhnanti -- do bind; dhananjaya -- O conqueror of riches.
TRANSLATION
One who acts in devotional service, renouncing the fruits of his actions, and whose doubts have been
destroyed by transcendental knowledge, is situated factually in the self. Thus he is not bound by the
reactions of work, O conqueror of riches.
Text 42
Therefore must this doubt that out of ignorance was born in your heart be cut by means of the weapon of
the knowledge of the soul; be situated in that yoga and rise to fight, o descendant of Bharata!
SANSKRIT

tasmâd ajnâna-sambhûtam
hrt-stham jnânâsinâtmanah
chittvainam samsayam yogam
âtisthottistha bhârata

WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; ajñâna-sambhutam -- born of ignorance; hrt-stham -- situated in the heart; jñâna -of knowledge; asina -- by the weapon; atmanah -- of the self; chittva -- cutting off; enam -- this;
samsayam -- doubt; yogam -- in yoga; atistha -- be situated; uttistha -- stand up to fight; bharata -- O
descendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Therefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance should be slashed by the weapon of
knowledge. Armed with yoga, O Bharata, stand and fight.

Chapter 4 - The Yoga of Knowledge

…Page 13 of 13

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 5

The Yoga of Work in Detachment

About the reality of detachment.
Text 1
Arjuna said: 'Krishna, You as well praise the renunciation of fruitive labor as the practice of yoga. Please
tell me which one is definitely more beneficial of the two.'
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
sannyâsam karmanâm krsna
punar yogam ca samsasi
yac chreya etayor ekam
tan me brûhi suniscitam
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; sannyâsam -- renunciation; karmanam -- of all activities; krsna -- O Krishna;
punah -- again; yogam -- devotional service; ca -- also; samsasi -- You are praising; yat -- which; sreyah -is more beneficial; etayoh -- of these two; ekam -- one; tat -- that; me -- unto me; bruhi -- please tell; suniscitam -- definitely.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Krishna, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and then again You recommend work
with devotion. Now will You kindly tell me definitely which of the two is more beneficial?
Text 2
The Supreme Lord replied: 'Renouncing [the fruits] and also action in yoga lead both to the path of
liberation, but compared to the renunciation of fruitive labor, the action in yoga is the better of the two.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
sannyâsah karma-yogas ca
nihsreyasa-karâv ubhau
tayos tu karma-sannyâsât
karma-yogo visisyate
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Personality of Godhead said; sannyâsah -- renunciation of work; karma-yogah -work in devotion; ca -- also; nihsreyasa-karau -- leading to the path of liberation; ubhau -- both; tayoh -of the two; tu -- but; karma-sannyâsat -- in comparison to the renunciation of fruitive work; karma-yogah
-- work in devotion; visisyate -- is better.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead replied: The renunciation of work and work in devotion are both good for
liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional service is better than renunciation of work.
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 1 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
He should always be known as a renouncing one who never likes or dislikes and who is free from the
duality, as certainly, o mighty armed one, he is happy who is liberated from being bound that way.
SANSKRIT

jneyah sa nitya-sannyâsî
yo na dvesti na kânksati
nirdvandvo hi mahâ-bâho
sukham bandhât pramucyate

WORD FOR WORD
jneyah -- should be known; sah -- he; nitya -- always; sannyâsi -- renouncer; yah -- who; na -- never;
dvesti -- abhors; na -- nor; kanksati -- desires; nirdvandvah -- free from all dualities; hi -- certainly; mahabaho -- O mighty-armed one; sukham -- happily; bandhat -- from bondage; pramucyate -- is completely
liberated.
TRANSLATION
One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known to be always renounced. Such a
person, free from all dualities, easily overcomes material bondage and is completely liberated, O mightyarmed Arjuna.
Text 4
The less intelligent see the analytic and the work of yoga as different, but not so the learned ones.
Situated in either one of them one will enjoy the complete of the result of both
SANSKRIT

sânkhya-yogau prthag bâlâh
pravadanti na panditâh
ekam apy âsthitah samyag
ubhayor vindate phalam

WORD FOR WORD
sankhya -- analytical study of the material world; yogau -- work in devotional service; prthak -- different;
balah -- the less intelligent; pravadanti -- say; na -- never; panditah -- the learned; ekam -- in one; api -even; asthitah -- being situated; samyak -- complete; ubhayoh -- of both; vindate -- enjoys; phalam -- the
result.
TRANSLATION
Only the ignorant speak of devotional service [karma-yoga] as being different from the analytical study of
the material world [Sankhya]. Those who are actually learned say that he who applies himself well to one
of these paths achieves the results of both.
Text 5
He who places what one achieves by analysis at the same level as what one achieves by work done in yoga
and thus sees study and selfless action as one, he actually sees it as it is.
SANSKRIT

yat sânkhyaih prâpyate sthânam
tad yogair api gamyate
ekam sânkhyam ca yogam ca
yah pasyati sa pasyati
WORD FOR WORD
yat -- what; sankhyaih -- by means of Sankhya philosophy; prapyate -- is achieved; sthanam -- place; tat -that; yogaih -- by devotional service; api -- also; gamyate -- one can attain; ekam -- one; sankhyam -analytical study; ca -- and; yogam -- action in devotion; ca -- and; yah -- one who; pasyati -- sees; sah -he; pasyati -- actually sees.
TRANSLATION
One who knows that the position reached by means of analytical study can also be attained by devotional
service, and who therefore sees analytical study and devotional service to be on the same level, sees
things as they are.
Text 6
But, renunciation, o mighty armed one, will afflict one with distress if one is without devotion, and while
a thinker united in selfless action reaches the Supreme without delay.
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 2 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

sannyâsas tu mahâ-bâho
duhkham âptum ayogatah
yoga-yukto munir brahma
na cirenâdhigacchati
WORD FOR WORD
sannyâsah -- the renounced order of life; tu -- but; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; duhkham -distress; aptum -- afflicts one with; ayogatah -- without devotional service; yoga-yuktah -- one engaged in
devotional service; munih -- a thinker; brahma -- the Supreme; na cirena -- without delay; adhigacchati -attains.
TRANSLATION
Merely renouncing all activities yet not engaging in the devotional service of the Lord cannot make one
happy. But a thoughtful person engaged in devotional service can achieve the Supreme without delay.
Text 7
Connected in yoga a purified soul, who is self controlled and has mastered his senses, is in compassion
with all living beings and although engaged in action he is never affected.
SANSKRIT

yoga-yukto visuddhâtmâ
vijitâtmâ jitendriyah
sarvabhûtâtmabhûtâtmâ
kurvann api na lipyate

WORD FOR WORD
yoga-yuktah -- engaged in devotional service; visuddha-atma -- a purified soul; vijita-atma -- selfcontrolled; jita-indriyah -- having conquered the senses; sarva-bhuta -- to all living entities; atma-bhutaatma -- compassionate; kurvan api -- although engaged in work; na -- never; lipyate -- is entangled.
TRANSLATION
One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his mind and senses is dear to everyone,
and everyone is dear to him. Though always working, such a man is never entangled.
Text 8-9
'In divine consciousness I certainly never do anything' thus thinks one who knows the truth in his seeing,
hearing, touching, smelling, eating, going, dreaming and breathing. Despite of his talking, forsaking,
accepting, opening and closing his eyes he considers it as [merely] an engagemnent of the senses.
SANSKRIT

naiva kincit karomîti
yukto manyeta tattva-vit
pasyan srnvan sprsanjighrann
asnan gacchan svapan svasan
pralapan visrjan grhnann
unmisan nimisann api
indriyânîndriyârthesu
vartanta iti dhârayan

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; eva -- certainly; kincit -- anything; karomi -- I do; iti -- thus; yuktah -- engaged in the divine
consciousness; manyeta -- thinks; tattva-vit -- one who knows the truth; pasyan -- seeing; srn van -hearing; sprsan -- touching; jighran -- smelling; asnan --,eating; gacchan -- going; svapan -- dreaming;
svasan -- breathing; pralapan -- talking; visrjan -- giving up; grhnan -- accepting; unmisan -- opening;
nimisan -- closing; api -- in spite of; indriyani -- the senses; indriya-arthesu -- in sense gratification;
vartante -- let them be so engaged; iti -- thus; dharayan -- considering.
TRANSLATION
A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating,
moving about, sleeping and breathing, always knows within himself that he actually does nothing at all.
Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, or opening or closing his eyes, he always knows that only
the material senses are engaged with their objects and that he is aloof from them.
Text 10
He who dedicates all his works to the spiritual forsaking of his attachments is never affected by sin like a
lotusleaf is in the water.
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 3 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

brahmany âdhâya karmâni
sangam tyaktvâ karoti yah
lipyate na sa pâpena
padma-patram ivâmbhasâ
WORD FOR WORD
brahmani -- unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhaya -- resigning; karmani -- all works; sangam -attachment; tyaktva -- giving up; karoti -- performs; yah -- who; lipyate -- is affected; na -- never; sah -he; papena -- by sin; padma-patram -- a lotus leaf; iva -- like; ambhasa -- by the water.
TRANSLATION
One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results unto the Supreme Lord, is
unaffected by sinful action, as the lotus leaf is untouched by water.
Text 11
With their body, mind and intelligence purified yogis even with their senses are acting in giving up the
attachments for the sake of the soul.
SANSKRIT

kâyena manasâ buddhyâ
kevalair indriyair api
yoginah karma kurvanti
sangam tyaktvâtma-suddhaye

WORD FOR WORD
kayena -- with the body; manasa -- with the mind; buddhya -- with the intelligence; kevalaih -- purified;
indriyaih -- with the senses; api -- even; yoginah -- Krishna conscious persons; karma -- actions; kurvanti -they perform; sangam -- attachment; tyaktva -- giving up; atma -- of the self; suddhaye -- for the purpose
of purification.
TRANSLATION
The yogis, abandoning attachment, act with body, mind, intelligence and even with the senses, only for
the purpose of purification.
Text 12
United in giving up the fruits they unflinching attain to perfect peace while the ones unconnected in the
desire to enjoy the results are entrapped in attachment.
SANSKRIT

yuktah karma-phalam tyaktvâ
sântim âpnoti naisthikîm
ayuktah kâma-kârena
phale sakto nibadhyate
WORD FOR WORD
yuktah -- one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam -- the results of all activities; tyaktva -giving up; santimn -- perfect peace; apnoti -- achieves; naisthikim -- unflinching; ayuktah -- one who is not
in Krishna consciousness; kama-karena -- for enjoying the result of work; phale -- in the result; saktah -attached; nibadhyate -- becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
The steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers the result of all activities to Me;
whereas a person who is not in union with the Divine, who is greedy for the fruits of his labor, becomes
entangled.
Text 13
By his thinking giving up all activities and remaining in happiness, the one who is controlled resides in the
city of nine gates [the body] and thus the embodied soul for sure never does anything nor does he cause
anything
SANSKRIT

sarva-karmâni manasâ
sannyâsyâste sukham vasî
nava-dvâre pure dehî
naiva kurvan na kârayan
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 4 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
sarva -- all; karmani -- activities; manasa -- by the mind; sannyâsya -- giving up; aste -- remains; sukham -in happiness; vasi -- one who is controlled; nava-dvare -- in the place where there are nine gates; pure -in the city; dehi -- the embodied soul; na -- never; eva -- certainly; kurvan -- doing anything; na -- not;
karayan -- causing to be done.
TRANSLATION
When the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally renounces all actions, he resides happily
in the city of nine gates [the material body], neither working nor causing work to be done.
Text 14
Never is he the one engaging in action nor does the master
[of that city] induce others to act, nor is he identified with
the results, as all is done by nature.
SANSKRIT

na kartrtvam na karmâni
lokasya srjati prabhuh
na karma-phala-samyogam
svabhâvas tu pravartate

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; kartrtvam -- proprietorship; na -- nor; karmani
-- activities; lokasya -- of the people; srjati -- creates;
prabhuh -- the master of the city of the body; na -- nor;
karma-phala -- with the results of activities; samyogam -connection; svabhavah -- the modes of material nature; tu
-- but; pravartate -- act.
TRANSLATION
The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does
not create activities, nor does he induce people to act, nor
does he create the fruits of action. All this is enacted by
the modes of material nature.

Text 15
Never is the one of power responsible for the sins or pious activities of anyone; it is the spiritual
knowledge that is covered by ignorance because of which the living beings are bewildered.
SANSKRIT

nâdatte kasyacit pâpam
na caiva sukrtam vibhuh
ajnânenâvrtam jnânam
tena muhyantijantavah

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; adatte -- accepts; kasyacit -- anyone's; papam -- sin; na -- nor; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; sukrtam -- pious activities; vibhuh -- the Supreme Lord; ajnanena -- by ignorance; avrtam --,covered;
jñânam -- knowledge; tena -- by that; muhyanti -- are bewildered; jantavah -- the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Nor does the Supreme Lord assume anyone's sinful or pious activities. Embodied beings, however, are
bewildered because of the ignorance which covers their real knowledge.
Text 16
But to the living entity whose nescience is destroyed by knowledge, that knowledge discloses the Supreme
Reality like the rising sun.
SANSKRIT

jnânena tu tad ajnânam
yesâm nâsitam âtmanah
tesâm âdityavaj jnânam
prakâsayati tat param
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 5 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
jnanena -- by knowledge; tu -- but; tat -- that; ajñânam -- nescience; yesam -- whose; nasitam -- is
destroyed; atmanah -- of the living entity; tesam -- their; aditya-vat -- like the rising sun; jñânam -knowledge; prakasayati -- discloses; tat param -- Krishna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
When, however, one is enlightened with the knowledge by which nescience is destroyed, then his
knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lights up everything in the daytime.
Text 17
With one's intelligence to that, self to that, faith to that and refuge in that, one will, being cleansed from
all misgivings by that knowledge, not return again.
SANSKRIT

tad-buddhayas tad-âtmânas
tan-nisthâs tat-parâyanâh
gacchanty apunar-âvrttim
jnâna-nirdhûta-kalmasâh

WORD FOR WORD
tat-buddhayah -- those whose intelligence is always in the Supreme; tat-atmanah -- those whose minds are
always in the Supreme; tat-nisthah -- those whose faith is only meant for the Supreme; tat-parayanah -who have completely taken shelter of Him; gacchanti -- go; apunah-avrttim -- to liberation; jñâna -- by
knowledge; nirdhuta -- cleansed; kalmasah -- misgivings.
TRANSLATION
When one's intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the Supreme, then one becomes fully
cleansed of misgivings through complete knowledge and thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.
Text 18
In a gentle brahmin fully educated, in a cow, in an elephant and surely also in an outcast, see those who
are wise [the soul] with equal vision.
SANSKRIT

vidyâ-vinaya-sampanne
brâhmane gavi hastini
suni caiva svapâke ca
panditâh sama-darsinah

WORD FOR WORD
vidya -- with education; vinaya -- and gentleness; sampanne -- fully equipped; brahmane -- in the
brahmana; gavi -- in the cow; hastini -- in the elephant; suni -- in the dog; ca -- and; eva -- certainly; svapake -- in the dog-eater (the outcaste); ca -- respectively; panditah -- those who are wise; sama-darsinah
-- who see with equal vision.
TRANSLATION
The humble sages, by virtue of true knowledge, see with equal vision a learned and gentle brahmana, a
cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste].
Text 19
In this life certainly those have conquered birth and death who in sameness have a fixed mind flawless in
the equanimity of the Supreme Spirit of which they are situated in the Supreme.
SANSKRIT

ihaiva tair jitah sargo
yesâm sâmye sthitam manah
nirdosam hi samam brahma
tasmâd brahmani te sthitâh

WORD FOR WORD
iha -- in this life; eva -- certainly; taih -- by them; jitah -- conquered; sargah -- birth and death; yesam -whose; samye -- in equanimity; sthitam -- situated; manah -- mind; nirdosam -- flawless; hi -- certainly;
samam -- in equanimity; brahma -- like the Supreme; tasmat -- therefore; brahmani -- in the Supreme; te
-- they; sthitah -- are situated.
TRANSLATION
Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have already conquered the conditions of
birth and death. They are flawless like Brahman, and thus they are already situated in Brahman.
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 6 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 20
Never rejoicing on achieving the pleasant nor getting agitated as well arriving at the unpleasant,
intelligent of his own and unbewildered, he who knows the spiritual is situated in transcendence.
SANSKRIT

na prahrsyet priyam prâpya
nodvijet prâpya câpriyam
sthira-buddhir asammûdho
brahma-vid brahmani sthitah

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; prahrsyet -- rejoices; priyam -- the pleasant; prapya -- achieving; na -- does not; udvijet -become agitated; prapya -- obtaining; ca -- also; apriyam -- the unpleasant; sthira-buddhih --selfintelligent; asammudhah -- unbewildered; brahma-vit -- one who knows the Supreme perfectly; brahmani
-- in the transcendence; sthitah -- situated.
TRANSLATION
A person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor laments upon obtaining something
unpleasant, who is self-intelligent, who is unbewildered, and who knows the science of God, is already
situated in transcendence.
Text 21
The one who is not attached to superficial pleasures finds, by concentrating on the spiritual of being
connected in the soul, in the self the happiness which is enjoyed as being unlimited.
SANSKRIT

bâhya-sparsesv asaktâtmâ
vindaty âtmani yat sukham
sa brahma-yoga-yuktâtmâ
sukham aksayam asnute

WORD FOR WORD
bahya-sparsesu -- in external sense pleasure; asakta-atma -- one who is not attached; vindati -- enjoys;
atmani -- in the self; yat -- that which; sukham -- happiness; sah -- he; brahma-yoga -- by concentration in
Brahman; yukta-atma -- self-connected; sukham -- happiness; aksayam -- unlimited; asnute -- enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure but is always in trance, enjoying the
pleasure within. In this way the self-realized person enjoys unlimited happiness, for he concentrates on
the Supreme.
Text 22
In that which certainly by the contact with the senses is a source of misery, the intelligent never take
delight, as that certainly is subjected to having a beginning and an end, o son of Kunti.
SANSKRIT

ye hi samsparsajâ bhogâ
duhkha-yonaya eva te
âdy-antavantah kaunteya
na tesu ramate budhah
WORD FOR WORD
ye -- those; hi -- certainly; samsparsa-jah -- by contact with the material senses; bhogah -- enjoyments;
duhkha -- distress; yonayah -- sources of; eva -- certainly; te -- they are; adi -- beginning; anta -- end;
vantah -- subject to; kaunteya -- O son of Kunti; na -- never; tesu -- in those; ramate -- takes delight;
budhah -- the intelligent person.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery, which are due to contact with the
material senses. O son of Kunti, such pleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man does
not.delight in them.
Text 23
He who in this material body is able to tolerate, before the body is forsaken, the lust and anger generated
from the urges, is a composed and happy human being.
SANSKRIT

saknotîhaiva yah sodhum
prâk sarîra-vimoksanât
kâma-krodhodbhavam vegam
sa yuktah sa sukhî narah
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 7 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
saknoti -- is able; iha eva -- in the present body; yah -- one who; sodhum -- to tolerate; prak -- before;
sarira -- the body; vimoksanat -- giving up; kama -- desire; krodha -- and anger; udbhavam -- generated
from; vegam -- urges; sah -- he; yuktah -- in trance; sah -- he; sukhi -- happy; narah -- human being.
TRANSLATION
Before giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the urges of the material senses and check
the force of desire and anger, he is well situated and is happy in this world.
Text 24
Surely anyone who happy from within takes pleasure in the self and dwells on the inner light is a yogi who
selfrealized attains to liberation in the Supreme.
SANSKRIT

yo'ntah-sukho 'ntarârâmas
tathântar-jyotir eva yah
sa yogî brahma-nirvânam
brahma-bhûto 'dhigacchati
WORD FOR WORD
yah -- one who; antah-sukhah -- happy from within; antah-aramah -- actively enjoying within; tatha -- as
well as; antah-jyotih -- aiming within; eva -- certainly; yah -- anyone; sah -- he; yogi -- a mystic; brahmanirvanam -- liberation in the Supreme; brahma-bhutah -- being self-realized; adhigacchati -- attains.
TRANSLATION
One whose happiness is within, who is active and rejoices within, and whose aim is inward is actually the
perfect mystic. He is liberated in the Supreme, and ultimately he attains the Supreme.
Text 25
Those achieve that spiritual liberation who live the inner life and are spotless; they are beyond the duality
in selfrealization and are engaged in work for the welfare of all living beings.
SANSKRIT

labhante brahma-nirvânam
rsayah ksîna-kalmasâh
chinna-dvaidhâ yatâtmânah
sarva-bhûta-hite ratâh
WORD FOR WORD
labhante -- achieve; brahma-nirvanam -- liberation in the Supreme; rsayah -- those who are active within;
ksina-kalmasah -- who are devoid of all sins; chinna -- having torn off; dvaidhah -- duality; yata-atmanah -engaged in self-realization; sarva-bhuta -- for all living entities; hite -- in welfare work; ratah -- engaged.
TRANSLATION
Those who are beyond the dualities that arise from doubts, whose minds are engaged within, who are
always busy working for the welfare of all living beings, and who are free from all sins achieve liberation
in the Supreme..
Text 26
The mind of renounced persons who are liberated from lust and anger is under full control and for them
who learned from the soul there is in the near future the guarantee of spiritual enlightenment.
SANSKRIT

kâma-krodha-vimuktânâm
yatînâm yata-cetasâm
abhito brahma-nirvânam
vartate viditâtmanâm
WORD FOR WORD
kama -- from desires; krodha -- and anger; vimuktanam -- of those who are liberated; yatinam -- of the
saintly persons; yata-cetasam -- who have full control over the mind; abhitah -- assured in the near
future; brahma-nirvanam -- liberation in the Supreme; vartate -- is there; vidita-atmanam -- of those who
are self-realized.
TRANSLATION
Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self-realized, self-disciplined and
constantly endeavoring for perfection, are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.
Text 27-28
Turned away from the unnecessary in the outer world not looking for it and concentrated between the
eyebrows in suspending the in- and outgoing breath keeping the air with it in ones nose, are the senses,
Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 8 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
mind and intelligence of the transcendentalist set to liberation as one who has discarded all wishes, fear
and anger is surely always of that liberation.
SANSKRIT

sparsân krtvâ bahir bâhyâms
caksus caivântare bhruvoh
prânâpânau samau krtvâ
nâsâbhyantara-cârinau
yatendriya-mano-buddhir
munir moksa-parâyanah
vigatecchâ-bhaya-krodho
yah sadâ mukta eva sah
WORD FOR WORD
sparsan -- sense objects, such as sound; krtva -- keeping; bahih -- external; bahyan -- unnecessary; caksuh
-- eyes; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; antare -- between; bhruvoh -- the eyebrows; prana-apanau -- up-and
down-moving air; samau -- in suspension; krtva -- keeping; nasa-abhyantara -- within the nostrils; carinau - blowing; yata -- controlled; indriya -- senses; manah -- mind; buddhih -- intelligence; munih -- the
transcendentalist; moksa -- for liberation; parayanah --being so destined; vigata -- having discarded; iccha
-- wishes; bhaya -- fear; krodhah -- anger; yah -- one who; sada -- always; muktah -- liberated; eva -certainly; sah -- he is.
TRANSLATION
Shutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and vision concentrated between the two
eyebrows, suspending the inward and outward breaths within the nostrils, and thus controlling the mind,
senses and intelligence, the transcendentalist aiming at liberation becomes free from desire, fear and
anger. One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.
Text 29
One who knows Me as the beneficiary of sacrifices, penances and austerities, as the Supreme Lord of all
the worlds and as the benefactor of all living beings, thus attains to peace.
SANSKRIT

bhoktâram yajna-tapasâm
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdam sarva-bhûtânâm
jnâtvâ mâm sântim rcchati

WORD FOR WORD
bhoktaram -- the beneficiary; yajna -- of sacrifices; tapasam -- and penances and austerities; sarva-loka -of all planets and the demigods thereof; maha-isvaram -- the Supreme Lord; su-hrdam -- the benefactor;
sarva -- of all; bhutanam -- the living entities; jnatva -- thus knowing; mam -- Me (Lord Krishna); santim -relief from material pangs; rcchati -- one achieves.
TRANSLATION
A person in full consciousness of Me, knowing Me to be the ultimate beneficiary of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods, and the benefactor and well-wisher of all living
entities, attains peace from the pangs of material miseries.

Chapter 5 - The Yoga of Work in Detachment

…Page 9 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 6

The Yoga of Meditation

About the nature of yoga and reïncarnation
Text 1
The Supreme Lord said: One who is not taking to the fruits and does his work dutiful is of the renounced
order and a yogi, but not he who is without [sacrifice to] the fire and does not do his duty.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
anâsritah karma-phalam
kâryam karma karoti yah
sa sannyâsî ca yogî ca
na niragnir na câkriyah
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Lord said; anasritah -- without taking shelter; karma-phalam -- of the result of
work; karyam -- obligatory; karma -- work; karoti -- performs; yah -- one who; sah -- he; sannyâsi -- in the
renounced order; ca -- also; yogi -- mystic; ca -- also; na -- not; nih -- without; agnih -- fire; na -- nor; ca - also; akriyah -- without duty.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One who is unattached to the fruits of his work and who works
as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, and he is the true mystic, not he who lights no fire and
performs no duty.
Text 2
Know that what is called sannyâs [the renounced order] is what links one to the Supreme, o son of Pându;
surely never will anyone become [such] a transcendentalist who does not give up the selfish motive.
SANSKRIT

yam sannyâsam iti prâhur
yogam tam viddhi pândava
na hy asannyâsta-sankalpo
yogî bhavati kascana
WORD FOR WORD
yam -- what; sannyâsam -- renunciation; iti -- thus; prahuh -- they say; yogam -- linking with the Supreme;
tam -- that; viddhi -- you must know; pandava -- O son of Pandu; na -- never; hi -- certainly; asannyâsta -without giving up; sankalpah -- desire for self-satisfaction; yogi -- a mystic transcendentalist; bhavati -becomes; kascana -- anyone.
TRANSLATION
What is called renunciation you should know to be the same as yoga, or linking oneself with the Supreme,
O son of Pându, for one can never become a yogi unless he renounces the desire for sense gratification.

Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 1 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
Of the sage who has just begun one says it is by means of work that one links up while of the ones who
attained it is said that it is surely the sameness that is the means of yoga.
SANSKRIT

âruruksor muner yogam
karma kâranam ucyate
yogârûdhasya tasyaiva
samah kâranam ucyate

WORD FOR WORD
aruruksoh -- who has just begun yoga; muneh -- of the sage; yogam -- the eightfold yoga system; karma -work; karanam -- the means; ucyate -- is said to be; yoga -- eightfold yoga; arudhasya -- of one who has
attained; tasya -- his; eva -- certainly; samah -- cessation of all material activities; karanam -- the means;
ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be the means; and for one who is
already elevated in yoga, cessation of all material activities is said to be the means.
Text 4
When surely he is never for the good of the senses engaged in the necessary fruitive labor, at that time he
is a renouncer of selfhood elevated in yoga, one says.
SANSKRIT

yadâ hi nendriyârthesuna
karmasv anusajjate
sarva-sankalpa-sannyâsî
yogârûdhas tadocyate

WORD FOR WORD
yada -- when; hi -- certainly; na -- not; indriya-arthesu -- in sense gratification; na -- never; karmasu -- in
fruitive activities; anusajjate -- one necessarily engages; sarva-sankalpa -- of all material desires; sannyâsi
-- renouncer; yoga-arudhah -- elevated in yoga; tada -- at that time; ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
A person is said to be elevated in yoga when, having renounced all material desires, he neither acts for
sense gratification nor engages in fruitive activities.
Text 5
One must free oneself by mindfulness and never put oneself down, as surely that selfinterest is indeed as
well the friend of the soul as the self its enemy.
SANSKRIT

uddhared âtmanâtmânam
nâtmânam avasâdayet
âtmaiva hy âtmano bandhur
âtmaiva ripur âtmanah
WORD FOR WORD
uddharet -- one must deliver; atmana -- by the mind; atmanam -- the conditioned soul; na -- never;
atmanam -- the conditioned soul; avasadayet -- put into degradation; atma -- mind; eva -- certainly; hi -indeed; atmanah -- of the conditioned soul; bandhuh -- friend; atma -- mind; eva -- certainly; ripuh -enemy; atmanah -- of the conditioned soul.
TRANSLATION
One must deliver himself with the help of his mind, and not degrade himself. The mind is the friend of the
conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.
Text 6
The mindful is the best friend of that living soul who by himself conquered himself, but to those who are
soulless the same mindfulness stays as an enemy.
SANSKRIT

bandhur âtmâtmanas tasya
yenâtmaivâtmanâ jitah
anâtmanas tu satrutve
vartetâtmaiva satru-vat
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 2 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
bandhuh -- friend; atma -- the mind; atmanah -- of the living entity; tasya -- of him; yena -- by whom;
atma -- the mind; eva -- certainly; atmana -- by the living entity; jitah -- conquered; anatmanah -- of one
who has failed to control the mind; tu -- but; satrutve -- because of enmity; varteta -- remains; atma eva - the very mind; satru-vat -- as an enemy.
TRANSLATION
For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for one who has failed to do so,
his mind will remain the greatest enemy.
Text 7
Those who conquered mindfully and thus attained to peace have reached the Supersoul its sameness in
cold and heat, happiness and distress as well as honor and dishonor.
SANSKRIT

jitâtmanah prasântasya
paramâtmâ samâhitah
sîtosna-sukha-duhkhesu
tathâ mânâpamânayoh

WORD FOR WORD
jita-atmanah -- of one who has conquered his mind; prasantasya -- who has attained tranquillity by such
control over the mind; parama-atma -- the Supersoul; samahitah -- approached completely; sita -- in cold;
usna -- heat; sukha -- happiness; duhkhesu -- and distress; tatha -- also; mana -- in honor; apamanayoh -and dishonor.
TRANSLATION
For one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached, for he has attained tranquillity.
To such a man happiness and distress, heat and cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.
Text 8
The soul satisfied by knowledge and wisdom is in the spiritual and in the control over his senses united and
thus one says, the yogi is indifferent about a clod of dirt, a stone or gold.
SANSKRIT

jnâna-vijnâna-trptâtmâ
kûtastho vijitendriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogî
sama-lostrâsma-kâncanah
WORD FOR WORD
jñâna -- by acquired knowledge; vijñâna -- and realized knowledge; trpta -- satisfied; atma -- a living
entity; kuta-sthah -- spiritually situated; vijita-indriyah -- sensually controlled; yuktah -- competent for
self-realization; iti -- thus; ucyate -- is said; yogi -- a mystic; sama -- equipoised; lostra -- pebbles; asma -stone; kancanah -- gold.
TRANSLATION
A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a yogi [or mystic] when he is fully
satisfied by virtue of acquired knowledge and realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence,and
is self-controlled. He sees everything -- whether it be pebbles, stones or gold -- as the same.
Text 9
And to have towards well-wishers, friends and enemies, neutrals and arbiters, hating ones and goodwilling relatives as well as to the pious as the sinners an equal intelligence, is [even] more advanced.
SANSKRIT

suhrn-mitrâry-udâsînamadhyastha-dvesya-bandhusu
sâdhusv api ca pâpesu
sama-buddhir visisyate

WORD FOR WORD
su-hrt -- to well-wishers by nature; mitra -- benefactors with affection; ari -- enemies; udasina -- neutrals
between belligerents; madhyastha -- mediators between belligerents; dvesya -- the envious; bandhusu -and the relatives or well-wishers; sadhusu -- unto the pious; api -- as well as; ca -- and; papesu -- unto the
sinnerssama-buddhih -- having equal intelligence; visisyate -- is far advanced.
TRANSLATION
A person is considered still further advanced when he regards honest well-wishers, affectionate
benefactors, the neutral, mediators, the envious, friends and enemies, the pious and the sinners all with
an equal mind.
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 3 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 10
The spiritual person [or yogi] must always remember himself being alone in a secluded position, in
controlled consciousness, without distraction and concerns about possessions.
SANSKRIT

yogî yunjîta satatam
âtmânam rahasi sthitah
ekâkî yata-cittâtmâ
nirâsîr aparigrahah

WORD FOR WORD
yogi -- a transcendentalist; yunjita -- must concentrate in Krishna consciousness; satatam -- constantly;
atmanam -- himself (by body, mind and self); rahasi -- in a secluded place; sthitah -- being situated; ekaki
-- alone; yata-citta-atma -- always careful in mind; nirasih -- without being attracted by anything else;
aparigrahah -- free from the feeling of possessiveness.
TRANSLATION
A transcendentalist should always engage his body, mind and self in relationship with the Supreme; he
should live alone in a secluded place and should always carefully control his mind. He should be free from
desires and feelings of possessiveness.
Text 11-12
At a sanctified spot he should put a seat not to high nor too low, covering a filling ['Kus'a grass'] with soft
cloth ['deerskin'] and then clear his busy mind to be one-pointed of heart with his senses and activities in
assuming postures of yoga.
SANSKRIT

sucau dese pratisthâpya
sthiram âsanam âtmanah
nâty-ucchritam nâtinîcam
cailâjina-kusottaram
tatraikâgram manah krtvâ
yata-cittendriya-kriyah
upavisyâsane yunjyâd
yogam âtma-visuddhaye

WORD FOR WORD
sucau -- in a sanctified; dese -- land; pratisthapya -- placing; sthiram -- firm; asanam -- seat; atmanah -his own; na -- not; ati -- too; ucchritam -- high; na -- nor; ati -- too; nicam -- low; caila-ajina -- of soft
cloth and deerskin; kusa -- and kusa grass; uttaram -- covering; tatra -- thereupon; eka-agram -- with one
attention; manah -- mind; krtva -- making; yata-citta -- controlling the mind; indriya -- senses; kriyah -and activities; upavisya -- sitting; asane -- on the seat; yunjyat -- should execute; yogam -- yogapractice;
atma -- the heart; visuddhaye -- for clarifying.
TRANSLATION
To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kusa grass on the ground and then
cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth. The seat should be neither too high nor too low and should be
situated in a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it very firmly and practice yoga to purify the heart
by controlling his mind, senses and activities and fixing the mind on one point.
Text 13-14
Keeping the body, head and neck straight, not moving, he should gaze at the tip of his nose without
looking elsewhere. With a calm self, without fear and loyal to the celibate, the one connecting should sit
to subdue the mind concentrating on Me as the ultimate goal.
SANSKRIT

samam kâya-siro-grivam
dhârayann acalam sthirah
sampreksya nâsikâgram svam
disas cânavalokayan
prasântâtmâ vigata-bhîr
brahmacâri-vrate sthitah
manah samyamya mac-citto
yukta âsîta mat-parah

Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 4 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
samam -- straight; kaya -- body; sirah -- head; grivam -- and neck; dharayan -- holding; acalam -unmoving; sthirah -- still; sampreksya -- looking; nasika -- of the nose; agram -- at the tip; svam -- own;
disah -- on all sides; ca -- also; anavalokayan -- not looking; prasanta -- unagitated; atma -- mind; vigatabhih -- devoid of fear; brahmacari-vrate -- in the vow of celibacy; sthitah -- situated; manah -- mind;
samyamya -- completely subduing; mat -- upon Me (Krishna); cittah -- concentrating the mind; yuktah -the actual yogi; asita -- should sit; mat -- Me; parah -- the ultimate goal.
TRANSLATION
One should hold one's body, neck and head erect in a straight line and stare steadily at the tip of the nose.
Thus, with an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one should
meditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the ultimate goal of life.
Text 15
Constantly practicing the soulfullness as mentioned, the meditator with a regulated mind attains to the
peace and heavenly abode of spiritual union.
SANSKRIT

yunjann evam sadâtmânam
yogî niyata-mânasah
sântim nirvâna-paramâm
mat-samsthâm adhigacchati

WORD FOR WORD
yunjan -- practicing; evam -- as mentioned above; sada -- constantly; atmanam -- body, mind and soul;
yogi -- the mystic transcendentalist; niyata-manasah -- with a regulated mind; santim -- peace; nirvanaparamam -- cessation of material existence; mat-samstham -- the spiritual sky (the kingdom of God);
adhigacchati -- does attain.
TRANSLATION
Thus practicing constant control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic transcendentalist, his mind
regulated, attains to the kingdom of God [or the abode of Krishna] by cessation of material existence.
Text 16
But nor is there yoga eating too much or with fasting excessively either, and also not with one who sleeps
too much, or with one who stays awake, o Arjuna.
SANSKRIT

nâtyasnatas tu yogo 'sti
na caikântam anasnatah
na câti svapna-sîlasya
jâgrato naiva cârjuna

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; ati -- too much; asnatah -- of one who eats; tu -- but; yogah -- linking with the Supreme; asti - there is; na -- nor; ca -- also; ekantam -- overly; anasnatah -- abstaining from eating; na -- nor; ca -also; ati -- too much; svapna-silasya -- of one who sleeps; jagratah -- or one who keeps night watch too
much; na -- not; eva -- ever; ca -- and; arjuna -- O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
There is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one eats too much or eats too little, sleeps
too much or does not sleep enough.
Text 17
With the regulation of eating and recreating, the duties of maintenance and sleep and wakefulness, the
yoga practice will put an end to the misery.
SANSKRIT

yuktâhâra-vihârasya
yukta-cestasya karmasu
yukta-svapnâvabodhasya
yogo bhavati duhkha-hâ

WORD FOR WORD
yukta -- regulated; ahara -- eating; viharasya -- recreation; yukta -- regulated; cestasya -- of one who
works for maintenance; karmasu -- in discharging duties; yukta -- regulated; svapna-avabodhasya -- sleep
and wakefulness; yogah -- practice of yoga; bhavati -- becomes; duhkha-ha -- diminishing pains.
TRANSLATION
He who is regulated in his habits of eating, sleeping, recreation, and work can mitigate all material pains
by practicing the yoga system.
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 5 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 18
When disciplined this way the consciousness for sure has become situated in transcendence without
hankering after sense-gratification, then one is thus said to be united [or employed].
SANSKRIT

yadâ viniyatam cittam
âtmany evâvatisthate
nisprhah sarva-kâmebhyo
yukta ity ucyate tadâ

WORD FOR WORD
yada -- when; viniyatam -- particularly disciplined; cittam -- the mind and its activities; atmani -- in the
transcendence; eva -- certainly; avatisthate -- becomes situated; nisprhah -- devoid of desire; sarva -- for
all kinds of; kamebhyah -- material sense gratification; yuktah -- well situated in yoga; iti -- thus; ucyate - is said to be; tada -- at that time.
TRANSLATION
When the yogi, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities and becomes situated in
transcendence -- devoid of all material desires -- he is said to be well established in yoga.
Text 19
The comparison to a lamp out of the wind that is not wavering is what one is reminded of with a yogi
whose balanced consciousness is connected in constantly being engaged in the soul.
SANSKRIT

yathâ dîpo nivâtastho
nengate sopamâ smrtâ
yogino yata-cittasya
yunjato yogam âtmanah
WORD FOR WORD
yatha -- as; dipah -- a lamp; nivata-sthah -- in a place without wind; na -- does not; ingate -- waver; sa -this; upama -- comparison; smrta -- is considered; yoginah -- of the yogi; yata-cittasya -- whose mind is
controlled; yunjatah -- constantly engaged; yogam -- in meditation; atmanah -- on transcendence.
TRANSLATION
As a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist, whose mind is controlled, remains
always steady in his meditation on the transcendent self.
Text 20-23
In that state wherein the consciousness stills by doing yoga, the self, that realizes its position in the
mindfullness of the soul, becomes satisfied. The supreme happiness, of which one knows that by
intelligence it can be accessed in the transcendence, will surely him who is situated in it never remove
from the truth. And anything else which by the attainment is also gained is never considered to be more
than that as in that position no miseries, however difficult they are, can put one of balance. Know that
the miseries resulting from contacting matter dissolve in this unification of yoga.

SANSKRIT
yatroparamate cittam
niruddham yoga-sevayâ
yatra caivâtmanâtmânam
pasyann âtmani tusyati
sukham âtyantikam yat tad
buddhi-grâhyam atîndriyam
vetti yatra na caivâyam
sthitas calati tattvatah
yam labdhvâ câparam lâbham
manyate nâdhikam tatah
yasmin sthito na duhkhena
gurunâpi vicâlyate
tam vidyâd duhkha-samyogaviyogam yoga-samjnitam
WORD FOR WORD
yatra -- in that state of affairs where; uparamate -- cease (because one feels transcendental happiness);
cittam -- mental activities; niruddham -- being restrained from matter; yoga-sevaya -- by performance of
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 6 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
yoga; yatra -- in which; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; atmana -- by the pure mind; atmanam -- the self;
pasyan -- realizing the position of; atmani -- in the self; tusyati -- one becomes satisfied;
sukham -- happiness; atyantikam -- supreme; yat -- which; tat -- that; buddhi -- by intelligence; grahyam - accessible; atindriyam -- transcendental; vetti -- one knows; yatra -- wherein; na -- never; ca -- also; eva
-- certainly; ayam -- he; sthitah -- situated; calati -- moves; tattvatah -- from the truth;
yam -- that which; labdhva -- by attainment; ca -- also; aparam -- any other; labham -- gain; manyate -considers; na -- never; adhikam -- more; tatah -- than that; yasmin -- in which; sthitah -- being situated;
na -- never; duhkhena -- by miseries; guruna api -- even though very difficult; vicalyate -- becomes
shaken; tam -- that; vidyat -- you mustknow; duhkha-samyoga -- of the miseries of material contact;
viyogam -- extermination; yoga-samjnitam -- called trance in yoga.
TRANSLATION
In the stage of perfection called trance, or samadhi, one's mind is completely restrained from material
mental activities by practice of yoga. This perfection is characterized by one's ability to see the self by
the pure mind and to relish and rejoice in the self. In that joyous state, one is situated in boundless
transcendental happiness, realized through transcendental senses. Established thus, one never departs
from the truth, and upon gaining this he thinks there is no greater gain. Being situated in such a position,
one is never shaken, even in the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom from all
miseries arising from material contact.
Text 24
That yoga one must practice with firm determination without deviating in mental speculations that are
born from lust; all this total forsaking by the mind is sure to be from the settling of the whole sensory
apparatus in all respects.
SANSKRIT

sa niscayena yoktavyo
yogo 'nirvinna-cetasâ
sankalpa-prabhavân kâmâms
tyaktvâ sarvân asesatah
manasaivendriya-grâmam
viniyamya samantatah
WORD FOR WORD
sah -- that; niscayena -- with firm determination; yoktavyah -- must be practiced; yogah -- yoga system;
anirvinna-cetasa -- without deviation;sankalpa -- mental speculations; prabhavan -- born of; kaman -material desires; tyaktva -- giving up; sarvan -- all; asesatah -- completely; manasa -- by the mind; eva -certainly; indriya-gramam -- the full set of senses; viniyamya -- regulating; samantatah -- from all sides.
TRANSLATION
One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with determination and faith and not be deviated from
the path. One should abandon, without exception, all material desires born of mental speculation and
thus control all the senses on all sides by the mind.
Text 25
Gradually step by step one should intelligently withdraw the mind by means of ones conviction, putting it
to the transcendent, not even thinking of making it any other way.
SANSKRIT

anaih sanair uparamed
buddhyâ dhrti-grhîtayâ
âtma-samstham manah krtvâ
na kincid api cintayet

WORD FOR WORD
sanaih -- gradually; sanaih -- step by step; uparamet -- one should hold back; buddhya -- by intelligence;
dhrti-grhitaya -- carried by conviction; atma-samstham -- placed in transcendence; manah -- mind; krtva - making; na -- not; kincit -- anything else; api -- even; cintayet -- should think of.
TRANSLATION
Gradually, step by step, one should become situated in trance by means of intelligence sustained by full
conviction, and thus the mind should be fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else.
Text 26
From wherever the agitated mind flickering and unsteady wanders one must certainly bring it back under
the control of the regulating self.
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 7 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

yato yato niscalati
manas cancalam asthiram
tatas tato niyamyaitad
âtmany eva vasam nayet

WORD FOR WORD
yatah yatah -- wherever; niscalati -- becomes verily agitated; manah -- the mind; cancalam -- flickering;
asthiram -- unsteady; tatah tatah -- from there; niyamya -- regulating; etat -- this; atmani -- in the self;
eva -- certainly; vasam -- control; nayet -- must bring under.
TRANSLATION
From wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw
it and bring it back under the control of the self.
Text 27
This yogi, whose mind is pacified, attains with his passions quieted to the spiritual liberation of being
freed from all reactions to sin.
SANSKRIT

prasânta-manasam hy enam
yoginam sukham uttamam
upaiti sânta-rajasam
brahma-bhûtam akalmasam

WORD FOR WORD
prasanta -- peaceful, fixed on the lotus feet of Krishna; manasam -- whose mind; hi -- certainly; enam -this; yoginam -- yogi; sukham -- happiness; uttamam -- the highest; upaiti -- attains; santa-rajasam -- mhis
passion pacified; brahma-bhutam -- liberation by identification with the Absolute; akalmasam -- freed
from all past sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
The yogi whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest perfection of transcendental happiness. He is
beyond the mode of passion, he realizes his qualitative identity with the Supreme, and thus he is freed
from all reactions to past deeds.
Text 28
Thus engaging the soul always the yogi is freed from sin in the transcendental joy of spiritual union and
thus he attains to its never ending happiness.
SANSKRIT

yunjann evam sadâtmânam
yogî vigata-kalmasah
sukhena brahma-samsparsam
atyantam sukham asnute
WORD FOR WORD
yunjan -- engaging in yoga practice; evam -- thus; sada -- always; atmanam -- the self; yogi -- one who is
in touch with the Supreme Self; vigata -- freed from; kalmasah -- all material contamination; sukhena -- in
transcendental happiness; brahma-samsparsam -- being in constant touch with the Supreme; atyantam -the highest; sukham -- happiness; asnute -- attains.
TRANSLATION
Thus the self-controlled yogi, constantly engaged in yoga practice, becomes free from all material
contamination and achieves the highest stage of perfect happiness in transcendental loving service to the
Lord.
Text 29
The soul in all beings and all beings in the soul - that is how someone in the spiritual union of yoga sees
everywhere with equal vision.
SANSKRIT

sarva-bhûta-stham âtmânam
sarva-bhûtâni câtmani
îksate yoga-yukta-âtmâ
sarvatra sama-darshanah

WORD FOR WORD
sarva-bhuta-stham -- situated in all beings; atmanam -- the Supersoul; sarva -- all; bhutani -- entities; ca - also; atmani -- in the self; iksate -- does see; yoga-yukta-atma -- one who is dovetailed in Krishna
consciousness; sarvatra -- everywhere; sama-darshanah -- seeing equally.
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 8 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
A true yogi observes Me in all beings and also sees every being in Me. Indeed, the self-realized person sees
Me, the same Supreme Lord everywhere.
Text 30
For whoever sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am not lost nor is He lost to Me.
SANSKRIT

yo mâm pasyati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pasyati
tasyâham na pranasyâmi
sa ca me na pranasyati

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- whoever; mam -- Me; pasyati -- sees; sarvatra -- everywhere; sarvam -- everything; ca -- and; mayi - in Me; pasyati -- sees; tasya -- for him; aham -- I; na -- not; pranasyami -- am lost; sah -- he; ca -- also;
me -- to Me; na -- nor; pranasyati -- is lost.
TRANSLATION
For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.
Text 31
He who is devoted to Me as situated in the heart of everyone dwells in oneness and whatever the
circumstances of such a transcendentalist, He will always remain in Me.
SANSKRIT

sarva-bhûta-sthitam yo mâm
bhajaty ekatvam âsthitah
sarvathâ vartamâno 'pi
sa yogî mayi vartate

WORD FOR WORD
sarva-bhuta-sthitam -- situated in everyone's heart; yah -- he who; mam -- Me; bhajati -- serves in
devotional service; ekatvam -- in oneness; asthitah -- situated; sarvatha -- in all respects; vartamanah -being situated; api -- in spite of; sah -- he; yogi -- the transcendentalist; mayi -- in Me; vartate -- remains.
TRANSLATION
Such a yogi, who engages in the worshipful service of the Supersoul, knowing that I and the Supersoul are
one, remains always in Me in all circumstances.
Text 32
He, O Arjuna, who, comparing the joy and sorrow everywhere, sees it equally - such a yogi is considered
the best.
SANSKRIT

âtmaupamyena sarvatra
samam pasyati yo 'rjuna
sukham vâ yadi vâ duhkham
sa yogî paramo matah

WORD FOR WORD
atma -- with his self; aupamyena -- by comparison; sarvatra -- everywhere; samam -- equally; pasyati -sees; yah -- he who; arjuna -- O Arjuna; sukham -- happiness; va -- or; yadi -- if; va -- or; duhkham -distress; sah -- such; yogi -- a transcendentalist; paramah -- perfect; matah -- is considered.
TRANSLATION
He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true equality of all beings, in both their
happiness and their distress, O Arjuna!
Text 33
Arjuna said: 'Of this system of yoga generally described by you. O Madhusûdana, I do, because of my
restlessness, not see its stablility in place.
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
yo 'yam yogas tvayâ proktah
sâmyena madhusûdana
etasyâham na pasyâmi
cancalatvât sthitim sthirâm

Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 9 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; yah ayam -- this system; yogah -- mysticism; tvaya -- by You; proktah -described; samyena -- generally; madhu-sudana -- O killer of the demon Madhu; etasya -- of this; aham -I; na -- do not; pasyami -- see; cancalatvat -- due to being restless; sthitim -- situation; sthiram -- stable.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You have summarized appears impractical and
unendurable to me, for the mind is restless and unsteady.
Text 34
The mind is surely flickle, o Krishna, agitating, strong and obstinate, to subdue it, I think, is as difficult as
controlling the wind.'
SANSKRIT

cancalam hi manah krsna
pramâthi balavad drdham
tasyâham nigraham manye
vâyor iva su-duskaram
WORD FOR WORD
cancalam -- flickering; hi -- certainly; manah -- mind; krsna -- O Krishna; pramathi -- agitating; bala-vat -strong; drdham -- obstinate; tasya -- its; aham -- I; nigraham -- subduing; manye -- think; vayoh -- of the
wind; iva -- like; su-duskaram -- difficult.
TRANSLATION
For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krishna, and to subdue it, I think, is more
difficult than controlling the wind.
Text 35
The Supreme Lord said: 'Undoubtedly, o mighty armed one, is the restless mind difficult to curb, but with
persistence, o son of Kunti, and also by detachment it can be controlled.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
asamsayam mahâ-bâho
mano durnigraham calam
abhyâsena tu kaunteya
vairâgyena ca grhyate

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Personality of Godhead said; asamsayam -- undoubtedly; maha-baho -- O mightyarmed one; manah -- the mind;durnigraham -- difficult to curb; calam -- flickering; abhyasena -- by
practice; tu -- but; kaunteya -- O son of Kunti; vairagyena -- by detachment; ca -- also; grhyate -- can be
so controlled.
TRANSLATION
Lord S'rî Krishna said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly very difficult to curb the restless
mind, but it is possible by suitable practice and by detachment.
Text 36
With a mind ill disciplined selfrealization is difficult, in My vision, but endeavouring with a practical mind
controlling appropriately one will achieve.'
SANSKRIT

asamyatâtmanâ yogo
dusprâpa iti me matih
vasyâtmanâ tu yatatâ
sakyo 'vâptum upâyatah
WORD FOR WORD
asamyata -- unbridled; atmana -- by the mind; yogah -- self-realization; dusprapah -- difficult to obtain; iti
-- thus; me -- My; matih -- opinion; vasya -- controlled; atmana -- by the mind; tu -- but; yatata -- while
endeavoring; sakyah -- practical; avaptum -- to achieve; upayatah -- by appropriate means.
TRANSLATION
For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work. But he whose mind is controlled and
who strives by appropriate means is assured of success. That is My opinion.
Text 37
Arjuna said:'What is the destiny, O Krishna, achieved by the one who fell from his belief and deviates from
the path of yoga with such a mind failing the highest perfection?.
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 10 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
ayatih sraddhayopeto
yogâc calita-mânasah
aprâpya yoga-samsiddhim
kâm gatim krsna gacchati
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; ayatih -- the unsuccessful transcendentalist; sraddhaya -- with faith; upetah
-- engaged; yogat -- from the mystic link; calita -- deviated; manasah -- who has such a mind; aprapya -failing to attain; yoga-samsiddhim -- the highest perfection in mysticism; kam -- which; gatim -destination; krsna -- O Krishna; gacchati -- achieves.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Krishna, what is the destination of the unsuccessful transcendentalist, who in the beginning
takes to the process of self-realization with faith but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and
thus does not attain perfection in mysticism?
Text 38
Does such a one who lost both [belief and practice] not perish like a riven cloud without a hold, o Mightyarmed One, confused on the path of transcendence as he is?
SANSKRIT

kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas
chinnâbhram iva nasyati
apratistho mahâ-bâho
vimûdho brahmanah pathi
WORD FOR WORD
kaccit -- whether; na -- not; ubhaya -- both; vibhrastah -- deviated from; chinna -- torn; abhram -- cloud;
iva -- like; nasyati -- perishes; apratisthah -- without any position; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed Krishna;
vimudhah -- bewildered; brahmanah -- of transcendence; pathi -- on the path.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed Krishna, does not such a man, who is bewildered from the path of transcendence, fall
away from both spiritual and material success and perish like a riven cloud, with no position in any sphere?
Text 39
This is my doubt, o Krishna, and I ask You to dispel it
completely, as besides You, there is certainly no other
remover of this doubt to be found.
SANSKRIT

etan me samsayam krsna
chettum arhasy asesatah
tvad-anyah samsayasyâsya
chettâ na hy upapadyate

WORD FOR WORD
etat -- this is; me -- my; samsayam -- doubt; krsna -- O
Krishna; chettum -- to dispel; arhasi -- You are
requested; asesatah -- completely; tvat -- than You;
anyah -- other; samsayasya -- of the doubt; asya -- this; chetta -- remover; na -- never; hi -- certainly;
upapadyate -- is to be found.
TRANSLATION
This is my doubt, O Krishna, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But for You, no one is to be found who
can destroy this doubt.
Text 40
The Supreme Lord said: 'O son of Prithâ, there is never in this world nor in the next one destruction for
one who is engaged in doing good; surely no one who does good will ever end in trouble.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
pârtha naiveha nâmutra
vinâsas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyâna-krt kascid
durgatim tâta gacchati
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 11 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; na eva -- never is
it so; iha -- in this material world; na -- never; amutra -- in the next life; vinasah -- destruction; tasya -his; vidyate -- exists; na -- never; hi -- certainly; kaiyana-krt -- one who is engaged in auspicious activities;
kascit -- anyone; durgatim -- to degradation; tata -- My friend; gacchati -- goes.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Son of Prithâ, a transcendentalist engaged in auspicious
activities does not meet with destruction either in this world or in the spiritual world; one who does good,
My friend, is never overcome by evil.
Text 41-42
After achieving the worlds of those who performed piously and after dwelling there for many years, the
one who fell from the path of yoga takes birth again in the house of those properous and pure, or he will
for sure take birth in the family of experienced yoga-adepts, although such a birth is surely very rare in
this world.
SANSKRIT

prâpya punya-krtâm lokân
usitvâ sâsvatîh samâh
sucînâm srimatâm gehe
yoga-bhrasto 'bhijâyate
athavâ yoginâm eva
kule bhavati dhîmatâm
etaddhi durlabhataram
loke janma yad îdrsam

WORD FOR WORD
prapya -- after achieving; punya-krtam -- of those who performed pious activities; lokan -- planets; usitva
-- after dwelling; sasvatih -- many; samah -- years; sucinam -- of the pious; sri-matam -- of the
prosperous; gehe -- in the house; yoga-bhrastah -- one who has fallen from the path of self-realization;
abhijayate -- takes his birth.
atha va -- or; yoginam -- of learned transcendentalists; eva -- certainly; kule -- in the family; bhavati -takes birth; dhi-matam -- of those who are endowed with great wisdom; etat -- this; hi -- certainly;
durlabha-taram -- very rare; loke -- in this world; janma -- birth; yat -- that which; idrsam -- like this.
TRANSLATION
The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets of the pious living entities, is
born into a family of righteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.Or [if unsuccessful after long
practice of yoga] he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely great in wisdom.
Certainly, such a birth is rare in this world.
Text 43
After that, he will revive the consciousness gained from his previous embodiment and then again will
strive for perfection, o son of Kuru.
SANSKRIT

tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhûyah
samsiddhau kuru-nandana
WORD FOR WORD
tatra -- thereupon; tam -- that; buddhi-samyogam -- revival of consciousness; labhate -- gains; paurvadehikam -- from the previous body; yatate -- he endeavors; ca -- also; tatah -- thereafter; bhuyah -- again;
samsiddhau -- for perfection; kuru-nandana -- O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATION
On taking such a birth, he revives the divine consciousness of his previous life, and he again tries to make
further progress in order to achieve complete success, O son of Kuru.
Text 44
By that previous practice, he certainly of his own will be attracted and even be inquisitive about yoga and
transcend the routines of rite and prayer.
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 12 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

pûrvâbhyâsena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaso 'pi sah
jijnâsur api yogasya
sabda-brahmâtivartate
WORD FOR WORD
purva -- previous; abhyasena -- by practice; tena -- by that; eva -- certainly; hriyate -- is attracted; hi -surely; avasah -- automatically; api -- also; sah -- he; jijnasuh -- inquisitive; api -- even; yogasya -- about
yoga; sabda-brahma -- ritualistic principles of scriptures; ativartate -- transcends.
TRANSLATION
By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he automatically becomes attracted to the yogic
principles -- even without seeking them. Such an inquisitive transcendentalist stands always above the
ritualistic principles of the scriptures.
Text 45
Endeavouring methodically such a transcendentalist will, seeing all of his sins washed off in achieving
perfection through many many births, thereafter attain to the highest destination [of self-realization].
SANSKRIT

prayatnâd yatamânas tu
yogî samsuddha-kilbisah
aneka-janma-samsiddhas
tato yâti parâm gatim
WORD FOR WORD
prayatnat -- by rigid practice; yatamanah -- endeavoring; tu -- and; yogi -- such a transcendentalist;
samsuddha -- washed off; kilbisah -- all of whose sins; aneka -- after many, many; janma -- births;
samsiddhah -- having achieved perfection; tatah -- thereafter; yati -- attains; param -- the highest; gatim
-- destination.
TRANSLATION
And when the yogi engages himself with sincere endeavor in making further progress, being washed of all
contaminations, then ultimately, achieving perfection after many, many births of practice, he attains the
supreme goal.
Text 46
The yogi is greater than the ascetics and the wise and also is the yogi considered greater than the ones
working for profit; therefore O Arjuna, become a yogi.
SANSKRIT

tapasvibhyo 'dhiko yogî
jnânibhyo 'pi mato 'dhikah
karmibhyas câdhiko yogî
tasmâd yogî bhavârjuna
WORD FOR WORD
tapasvibhyah -- than the ascetics; adhikah -- greater; yogi -- the yogi; jnanibhyah -- than the wise; api -also; matah -- considered; adhikah -- greater; karmibhyah -- than the fruitive workers; ca -- also; adhikah
-- greater; yogi -- the yogi; tasmat -- therefore; yogi -- a transcendentalist; bhava -- just become; arjuna - O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
A yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and greater than the fruitive worker.
Therefore, O Arjuna, in all circumstances, be a yogi.
Text 47
And of all sorts of yogîs, the one who in full faith is always within himself thinking of Me and rendering
transcendental service, I consider to be the greatest.
SANSKRIT

yoginâm api sarvesâm
mad-gatenântarâtmanâ
sraddhâvân bhajate yo mâm
sa me yuktatamo matah
Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 13 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yoginam -- of yogis; api -- also; sarvesam -- all types of; mat-gatena -- abiding in Me, always thinking of
Me; antah-atmana -- within himself; sraddha-van -- in full faith; bhajate -- renders transcendental loving
service; yah -- one who; mam -- to Me (the Supreme Lord); sah -- he; me -- by Me; yukta-tamah -- the
greatest yogi; matah -- is considered.
TRANSLATION
And of all yogis, the one with great faith who always abides in Me, thinks of Me within himself, and
renders transcendental loving service to Me -- he is the most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the
highest of all. That is My opinion.

Chapter 6 - The Yoga of Meditation

…Page 14 of 14

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 7

The Yoga of Wisdom

About knowing and realizing oneself
Text 1
The Supreme Lord said: ' Try to hear about, how attached to Me in the mind, O son of Prithâ, practicing
unification under My care, you can know that complete of Me without any doubt.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
mayy âsakta-manâh pârtha
yogam yunjan mad-âsrayah
asamsayam samagram mâm
yathâ jnâsyasi tac chrnu
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Lord said; mayi -- to Me; asakta-manah -- mind attached; Prithâ-- O son
of Prithâ; yogam -- self-realization; yunjan -- practicing; mat-asrayah -- in consciousness of Me (Krishna
consciousness); asamsayam -- without doubt; samagram -- completely; mam -- Me; yatha -- how; jnasyasi - you can know; tat -- that; srnu -- try to hear.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Now hear, O son of Prithâ, how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free from doubt.
Text 2
I shall now in full explain to you this knowledge together with its wisdom, knowing which leaves one
nothing further to be known in this world.
SANSKRIT

jnânam te 'ham sa-vijnânam
idam vaksyâmy asesatah
yaj jnâtvâ neha bhûyo 'nyaj
jnâtavyam avasisyate

WORD FOR WORD
jñânam -- phenomenal knowledge; te -- unto you; aham -- I; sa -- with; vijñânam -- numinous knowledge;
idam -- this; vaksyami -- shall explain; asesatah -- in full; yat -- which; jnatva -- knowing; na -- not; iha -in this world; bhuyah -- further; anyat -- anything more; jnatavyam -- knowable; avasisyate -- remains.
TRANSLATION
I shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge, both phenomenal and numinous. This being known,
nothing further shall remain for you to know.
Text 3
Out of thousands of men but a single one endeavors for perfection and of those endeavoring thus there is
indeed but a single one who really knows Me.
Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 1 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

manusyânâm sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhaye
yatatâm api siddhânâm
kascin mâm vetti tattvatah
WORD FOR WORD
manusyanam -- of men; sahasresu -- out of many thousands; kascit -- someone; yatati -- endeavors;
siddhaye -- for perfection; yatatam -- of those so endeavoring; api -- indeed; siddhanam -- of those who
have achieved perfection; kascit -- someone; mam -- Me; vetti -- does know; tattvatah -- in fact.
TRANSLATION
Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection,, and of those who have achieved
perfection, hardly one knows me in truth.
Text 4
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and certainly false ego thus together are my eight
separated energies.
SANSKRIT

bhûmir âpo 'nalo vâyuh
kham mano buddhir eva ca
ahankâra itiyam me
bhinnâ prakritir astadhâ

WORD FOR WORD
bhumih -- earth; apah -- water; analah -- fire; vayuh -- air; kham -- ether; manah -- mind; buddhih -intelligence; eva -- certainly; ca -- and; ahankarah -- false ego; iti -- thus; iyam -- all these; me -- My;
bhinna -- separated; prakritih -- energies; astadha -- eightfold.
TRANSLATION
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego -- all together these eight constitute My
separated material energies.
Text 5
Try to understand that besides these lower ones there is another energy that is the superior of Me as the
soul of the living entities, o mighty armed one, which is sustaining this material world.
SANSKRIT

apareyam itas tv anyâm
prakritim viddhi me parâm
jîva-bhûtâm mahâ-bâho
yayedam dhâryate jagat
WORD FOR WORD
apara -- inferior; iyam -- this; itah -- besides this; tu -- but; anyam -- another; prakritim -- energy; viddhi - just try to understand; me -- My; param -- superior; jiva-bhutam -- comprising the living entities; mahabaho -- O mighty-armed one; yaya -- by whom; idam -- this; dharyate -- is utilized or exploited; jagat -the material world.
TRANSLATION
Besides these, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another, superior energy of Mine, which comprises the
living entities who are exploiting the resources of this material, inferior nature.
Text 6
All created is rooted in these two; know that of all included in this universe I am as well the source of
manifestation as its dissolution.
SANSKRIT

etad-yonîni bhûtâni
sarvânîty upadhâraya
aham krtsnasya jagatah
prabhavah pralayas tathâ
WORD FOR WORD
etat -- these two natures; yonini -- whose source of birth; bhuta-ni -- everything created; sarvani -- all; iti
-- thus; upadharaya -- know; aham -- I; krtsnasya -- all-inclusive; jagatah -- of the world; prabhavah -- the
source of manifestation; pralayah -- annihilation; tatha -- as well as.
Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 2 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
All created beings have their source in these two natures. Of all that is material and all that is spiritual in
this world, know for certain that I am both the origin and the dissolution.
Text 7
Beyond the superior of Me, there is nothing else to be found , o conquerer of wealth; in Me is all that we
see strung like pearls on a thread.
SANSKRIT

mattah parataram nânyat
kincid asti dhananjaya
mayi sarvam idam protam
sûtre mani-ganâ iva
WORD FOR WORD
mattah -- beyond Me; para-taram -- superior; na -- not; anyat kincit -- anything else; asti -- there is;
dhananjaya -- O conqueror of wealth; mayi -- in Me; sarvam -- all that be; idam -- which we see; protam -is strung; sutre -- on a thread; mani-ganah -- pearls; iva -- like.
TRANSLATION
O conqueror of wealth, there is no truth superior to Me. Everything rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on
a thread.
Text8
I am the taste of water, o son of Kunti, the light I am of the moon and the sun, the pranava [A.U.M.] in all
the Vedas , the sound in the sky and manhood in man.
SANSKRIT

raso 'ham apsu kaunteya
prabhâsmi sasi-sûryayoh
pranavah sarva-vedesu
sabdah khe paurusam nrsu

WORD FOR WORD
rasah -- taste; aham -- I; apsu -- in water; kaunteya -- O son of Kunti; prabha -- the light; asmi -- I am;
sasi-suryayoh -- of the moon and the sun; pranavah -- the three letters a-u-m; sarva -- in all; vedesu -- the
Vedas; sabdah -- sound vibration; khe -- in the ether; paurusam -- ability; nrsu -- in men.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti, I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and the moon, the syllable om in the Vedic
mantras; I am the sound in ether and ability in man.
Text 9
Also the pure fragrance of the earth as well as the heat of fire I am and the life in all living beings and the
penance in the repentant I am too.
SANSKRIT

punyo gandhah prthivyâm ca
tejas câsmi vibhâvasau
jivanam sarva-bhûtesu
tapas câsmi tapasvisu

WORD FOR WORD
punyah -- original; gandhah -- fragrance; prthivyam -- in the earth; ca -- also; tejah -- heat; ca -- also;
asmi -- I am; vibhavasau -- in the fire; jivanam -- life; sarva -- in all; bhutesu -- living entities; tapah -penance; ca -- also; asmi -- I am; tapasvisu -- in those who practice penance.
TRANSLATION
I am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I am the life of all that lives, and I am
the penances of all ascetics.
Text 10
Know, o son of Prithâ, that I am the seed of all living beings , the original intelligence of the intelligent I
am; I am the prowess of the powerful.
SANSKRIT

bîjam mâm sarva-bhûtânâm
viddhi pârtha sanâtanam
buddhir buddhimatâm asmi
tejas tejasvinâm aham
Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 3 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
bijam -- the seed; mam -- Me; sarva-bhutanam -- of all living entities; viddhi -- try to understand; Prithâ-O son of Prithâ; sanatanam -- ,original, eternal; buddhih -- intelligence; buddhi-matam -- of the
intelligent; asmi -- I am; tejah -- prowess; tejasvinam -- of the powerful; aham -- I am.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the intelligence of the intelligent, and
the prowess of all powerful men.
Text 11
I am the strenght of the strong that is free from desire and attachment and, o Lord of the Bhâratas, I am
the sex-life in all living beings that is consistent with its nature [procreation].
SANSKRIT

balam balavatâm câham
kâma-râga-vivarjitam
dharmâviruddho bhûtesu
kâmo 'smi bharatarsabha

WORD FOR WORD
balam -- strength; bala-vatam -- of the strong; ca -- and; aham -- I am; kama -- passion; raga -- and
attachment; vivarjitam -- devoid of; dharma-aviruddhah -- not against religious principles; bhutesu -- in
all beings; kamah -- sex life; asmi -- I am; bharata-rsabha -- O lord of the Bhâratas.
TRANSLATION
I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex life which is not contrary to
religious principles, O lord of the Bhâratas [Arjuna].
Text 12
And try to understand that of all which is surely in the state of
goodness, passion and slowness and thus all that is certainly so of
Me, you should not know Me as being in them but that they are in
Me.
SANSKRIT

ye caiva sâttvikâ bhâvâ
râjasâs tâmasâs ca ye
matta eveti tân viddhi
na tv aham tesu te mayi

WORD FOR WORD
ye -- all which; ca -- and; eva -- certainly; sattvikah -- in
goodness; bhavah -- states of being; rajasah -- in the mode of
passion; tamasah -- in the mode of ignorance; ca -- also; ye -- all
which; mattah -- from Me; eva -- certainly; iti -- thus; tan -those; viddhi -- try to know; na -- not; tu -- but; aham -- I; tesu -in them; te -- they; mayi -- in Me.
TRANSLATION
Know that all states of being -- be they of goodness, passion or ignorance -- are manifested by My energy.
I am, in one sense, everything, but I am independent. I am not under the modes of material nature, for
they, on the contrary, are within Me.
Text 13
From all these three states consisting of the natural modes the whole world is deluded not knowing Me as
being situated above them as the inexhaustible Supreme.
SANSKRIT

tribhir guna-mayair bhâvair
ebhih sarvam idam jagat
mohitam nâbhijânâti
mâm ebhyah param avyayam
WORD FOR WORD
tribhih -- three; guna-mayaih -- consisting of the gunas; bhavaih -- by the states of being; ebhih -- all
these; sarvam -- whole; idam -- this; jagat -- universe; mohitam -- deluded; na abhijanati -- does not
know; mam -- Me; ebhyah -- above these; param -- the Supreme; avyayam -- inexhaustible.
Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 4 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Deluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole world does not know Me, who
am above the modes and inexhaustible.
Text 14
This divine energy of Mine the way it is consisting of the three modes is very difficult to overcome, but
surely they who surrender to Me will overcome this illusory of matter [mâyâ]
SANSKRIT

daivî hy esâ gunamayî
mama mâyâ duratyayâ
mâm eva ye prapadyante
mâyâm etâm taranti te
WORD FOR WORD
daivi -- transcendental; hi -- certainly; esa -- this; guna-mayi -- consisting of the three modes of material
nature; mama -- My; maya -- energy; duratyaya -- very difficult to overcome; mam -- unto Me; eva -certainly; ye -- those who; prapadyante -- surrender; mayam etam -- this illusory energy; taranti -overcome; te -- they.
TRANSLATION
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But
those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it.
Text 15
The ones who do evil and the foolish do not surrender to Me; the lowest of mankind whose knowledge is
stolen by this mâyâ have adopted the demoniac nature.
SANSKRIT

na mâm duskrtino mûdhâh
prapadyante narâdhamâh
mâyayâpahrta-jnânâ
âsuram bhâvam âsritâh

WORD FOR WORD
na -- not; mam -- unto Me; duskrtinah -- miscreants; mudhah -- foolish;prapadyante -- surrender; naraadhamah -- lowest among mankind; mayaya -- by the illusory energy; apahrta -- stolen; jñânah -- whose
knowledge; asuram -- demonic; bhavam -- nature; asritah -- accepting.
TRANSLATION
Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, who are lowest among mankind, whose knowledge is stolen by
illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons do not surrender unto Me.
Text 16
Of the pious of men there are four kinds that are devoted to Me, o Arjuna: the distressed, the inquisitive,
the ones desiring material gain and the ones who know things as they are as well, o great one of the
Bhâratas.
SANSKRIT

catur-vidhâ bhajante mâm
janâh sukrtino 'rjuna
ârto jijnâsur arthârthî
jnânî ca bharatarsabha

WORD FOR WORD
catuh-vidhah -- four kinds of; bhajante -- render services; mam -- unto Me; janah -- persons; su-krtinah -those who are pious; arjuna -- O Arjuna; artah -- the distressed; jijnasuh -- the inquisitive; artha-arthi -one who desires material gain; jnani -- one who knows things as they are; ca -- also; bharata-rsabha -- O
great one amongst the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O best among the Bhâratas, four kinds of pious men begin to render devotional service unto Me -- the
distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.
Text 17
Of these the one, who is always aligned in the sole devotion of knowing things as they are, is specially
dear, for certainly as with the person of knowledge I am held high, he is also favored by Me.
SANSKRIT

tesâm jnânî nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir visisyate

Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 5 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

priyo hi jnânino' tyartham
aham sa ca mama priyah
WORD FOR WORD
tesam -- out of them; jnani -- one in full knowledge; nitya-yuktah -- always engaged; eka -- only; bhaktih - in devotional service; visisyate -- is special; priyah -- very dear; hi -- certainly; jnaninah -- to the person
in knowledge; atyartham -- highly; aham -- I am; sah -- he; ca -- also; mama -- to Me; priyah -- dear.
TRANSLATION
Of these, the one who is in full knowledge and who is always engaged in pure devotional service is the
best. For I am very dear to him, and he is dear to Me.
Text 18
All these of knowledge are undoubtedly all very noble, but He who in his soul is connected to Me I
consider to be alike Myself, as in Me is certainly found the highest destination.
SANSKRIT

udârâh sarva evaite
jnânî tv âtmaiva me matam
âsthitah sa hi yuktâtmâ
mâm evânuttamâm gatim

WORD FOR WORD
udarah -- magnanimous; sarve -- all; eva -- certainly; ete -- these; jnani -- one who is in knowledge; tu -but; atma eva- just like Myself; me -- My; matam -- opinion; asthitah -- situated; sah -- he; hi -- certainly;
yukta-atma -- engaged in devotional service; mam -- in Me; eva -- certainly; anuttamam -- the highest;
gatim -- destination.
TRANSLATION
All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is situated in knowledge of Me I
consider to be just like My own self. Being engaged in My transcendental service, he is sure to attain Me,
the highest and most perfect goal.
Text 19
After many lives one who knows Me surrenders to My Universal reality [Vâsudeva], knowing Me to be all
that is - such a great soul is thus very rare.
SANSKRIT

bahûnâm janmanâm ante
jnânavân mâm prapadyate
vâsudevah sarvam iti
sa mahâtmâ sudurlabhah

WORD FOR WORD
bahunam -- many; janmanam -- repeated births and deaths; ante -- after; jñâna-van -- one who is in full
knowledge; mam -- unto Me; prapadyate-- surrenders; vasudevah -- the Personality of Godhead, Krishna;
sarvam m-- everything; iti -- thus; sah -- that; maha-atma -- great soul; su-durlabhah -- very rare to see.
TRANSLATION
After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the
cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare.
Text 20
Because of various desires those deprived of knowledge surrender themselves to the demigods and their
corresponding regulations, following them according their own nature.
SANSKRIT

kâmais tais tair hrta-jnânâh
prapadyante 'nya-devatâh
tam tam niyamam âsthâya
prakrtyâ niyatâh svayâ

WORD FOR WORD
kamaih -- by desires; taih taih -- various; hrta -- deprived of; jñânah -- knowledge; prapadyante -surrender; anya -- to other; devatah -- demigods; tam tam -- corresponding; niyamam -- regulations;
asthaya -- following; prakrtya -- by nature; niyatah -- controlled; svaya -- by their own.
TRANSLATION
Those whose intelligence has been stolen by material desires surrender unto demigods and follow the
particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures.
Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 6 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 21
Whoever is faithfully devoted to whatever form of a demigod in worship as desired, him so I surely give a
steady faith.
SANSKRIT

yo yo yâm yâm tanum bhaktah
sraddhayârcitum icchati
tasya tasyâcalâm sraddhâm
tâm eva vidadhâmy aham

WORD FOR WORD
yah yah -- whoever; yam yam -- whichever; tanum -- form of a demigod; bhaktah -- devotee; sraddhaya -with faith; arcitum -- to worship; icchati -- desires; tasya tasya -- to him; acalam -- steady; sraddham -faith; tam -- that; eva -- surely; vidadhami -- give; aham -- I.
TRANSLATION
I am in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to worship some demigod, I make his
faith steady so that he can devote himself to that particular deity.
Text 22
Endowed with that inspiration of that demigod he for that worship obtains what he aspires and certainly is
that from his desires arranged by Me only.
SANSKRIT

sa tayâ sraddhayâ yuktas
tasyârâdhanam îhate
labhate ca tatah kâmân
mayaiva vihitân hi tân
WORD FOR WORD
sah -- he; taya -- with that; sraddhaya -- inspiration; yuktah -- endowed; tasya -- of that demigod;
aradhanam -- for the worship; ihate -- he aspires; labhate -- obtains; ca -- and; tatah -- from that; kaman
-- his desires; maya -- by Me; eva -- alone; vihitan -- arranged; hi -- certainly; tan -- those.
TRANSLATION
Endowed with such a faith, he endeavors to worship a particular demigod and obtains his desires. But in
actuality these benefits are bestowed by Me alone.
Text 23
But perishable are the fruits that become of those who are less intelligent; those who go for the gods
attain to them, while those who are My devotees as well attain to Me.
SANSKRIT

antavat tu phalam tesâm
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasâm
devân deva-yajo yânti
mad-bhaktâ yânti mâm api

WORD FOR WORD
anta-vat -- perishable; tu -- but; phalam -- fruit; tesam -- their; tat -- that; bhavati -- becomes; alpamedhasam -- of those of small intelligence; devan -- to the demigods; deva-yajah -- the worshipers of the
demigods; yanti -- go; mat -- My; bhaktah -- devotees; yanti -- go; mam -- to Me; api -- also.
TRANSLATION
Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary. Those who
worship the demigods go to the planets of the demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme
planet.
Text 24
The less intelligent think that I manifested out of the unmanifested without them knowing of My supreme
existence that is imperishable and the finest.
SANSKRIT

Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

avyaktam vyaktim âpannam
manyante mâm abuddhayah
param bhâvam ajânanto
mamâvyayam anuttamam
…Page 7 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
avyaktam -- nonmanifested; vyaktim -- personality; apannam -- achieved; manyante -- think; mam -- Me;
abuddhayah -- less intelligent persons; param -- supreme; bhavam -- existence; ajanantah -- without
knowing; mama -- My; avyayam -- imperishable; anuttamam -- the finest.
TRANSLATION
Unintelligent men, who do not know Me perfectly, think that I, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krishna, was impersonal before and have now assumed this personality. Due to their small knowledge,
they do not know My higher nature, which is imperishable and supreme.
Text 25
I am not manifest to everyone, as the foolish are covered by illusory concepts of union; they cannot
understand Me as being situated in the unborn and inexhaustible.
SANSKRIT

nâham prakâsah sarvasya
yoga-mâyâ-samâvrtah
mûdho 'yam nâbhijânâti
loko mâm ajam avyayam
WORD FOR WORD
na -- nor; aham -- I; prakasah -- manifest; sarvasya -- to everyone; yoga-maya -- by internal potency;
samavrtah -- covered; mudhah -- foolish; ayam -- these; na -- not; abhijanati -- can understand; lokah -persons; mam -- Me; ajam -- unborn; avyayam -- inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered by My internal potency, and
therefore they do not know that I am unborn and infallible.
Text 26
I know all of the past, the present and, O Arjuna, the future as well of all living beings, but Me nobody
[really] knows.
SANSKRIT

vedâham samatîtâni
vartamânâni cârjuna
bhavisyâni ca bhûtâni
mâm tu veda na kascana

WORD FOR WORD
veda -- know; aham -- I; samatitani -- completely past; vartamanani -- present; ca -- and; arjuna -- O
Arjuna; bhavisyani -- future; ca -- also; bhutani -- all living entities; mam -- Me; tu -- but; veda -- knows;
na -- not; kascana -- anyone.
TRANSLATION
O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that has happened in the past, all
that is happening in the present, and all things that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me
no one knows.
Text 27
By the illusion of duality that arose from liking and disliking, o scion of Bhârata, all the living entities are,
from the beginning, deluded, O conqueror of the foes.
SANSKRIT

icchâ-dvesa samutthena
dvandva-mohena bhârata
sarva-bhûtâni sammoham
sarge yânti parantapa

WORD FOR WORD
iccha -- desire; dvesa -- and hate; samutthena -- arisen from; dvandva -- of duality; mohena -- by the
illusion; bharata -- O scion of Bharata; sarva -- all; bhutani -- living entities; sammoham -- into delusion;
sarge -- while taking birth; yanti -- go; parantapa -- O conqueror of enemies.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bhârata, O conqueror of the foe, all living entities are born into delusion, bewildered by
dualities arisen from desire and hate.

Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 8 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 28
The sins of those persons have come to an end who' s previous activities were pious; they are free from
the delusion of duality and engage with determination in the service of Me.
SANSKRIT

yesâm tv anta-gatam pâpam
janânâm punya-karmanâm
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktâ
bhajante mâm drdha-vratâh

WORD FOR WORD
yesam -- whose; tu -- but; anta-gatam -- completely eradicated; papam -- sin; jananam -- of the persons;
punya -- pious; karmanam -- whose previous activities; te -- they; dvandva -- of duality; moha -- delusion;
nirmuktah -- free from; bhajante -- engage in devotional service; mam -- to Me; drdha-vratah -- with
determination.
TRANSLATION
Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life and whose sinful actions are completely
eradicated are freed from the dualities of delusion, and they engage themselves in My service with
determination.
Text 29
For being liberated from birth and death all persons who so endeavor take shelter of Me and are actually
of the spiritual; they are fully acquainted with everything about the individual transcendence of material
actions.
SANSKRIT

jarâ-marana-moksâya
mâm âsritya yatanti ye
te brahma tad viduh krtsnam
adhyâtmam karma câkhilam
WORD FOR WORD
jara -- from old age; marana -- and death; moksaya -- for the purpose of liberation; mam -- Me; asritya -taking shelter of; yatanti -- endeavor; ye -- all those who; te -- such persons; brahma -- Brahman; tat -actually that; viduh -- they know; krtsnam -- everything; adhyatmam -- transcendental; karma -activities; ca -- also; akhilam -- entirely.
TRANSLATION
Intelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and death take refuge in Me in
devotional service. They are actually Brahman because they entirely know everything about
transcendental activities.
Text 30
Those who know Me as ruling all as well as the godly and the sacrifices also; they with their minds
connected in Me even know me at the time of their death too.
SANSKRIT

sâdhibhûtâdhidaivam mâm
sâdhiyajnam ca ye viduh
prayâna-kâle 'pi ca mâm
te vidur yukta-cetasah

WORD FOR WORD
sa-adhibhuta -- and the governing principle of the material manifestation; adhidaivam -- governing all the
demigods; mam -- Me; sa-adhiyajnam -- and governing all sacrifices; ca -- also; ye -- those who; viduh -know; prayana -- of death; kale -- at the time; api -- even; ca -- and; mam -- Me; te -- they; viduh -know; yukta-cetasah -- their minds engaged in Me.
TRANSLATION
Those in full consciousness of Me, who know Me, the Supreme Lord, to be the governing principle of the
material manifestation, of the demigods, and of all methods of sacrifice, can understand and know Me,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even at the time of death.

Chapter 7 - The Yoga of Wisdom

…Page 9 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

Chapter 8

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

On Salvation
Text 1
Arjuna said: what is that Spirit, what about the soul of oneself and what are fruitive activities; what
about, o Supreme One, the material manifestation and what to say about what one calls the godly [or
demigods]?
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
kim tad brahma kim adhyâtmam
kim karma purusottama
adhibhûtam ca kim proktam
adhidaivam kim ucyate

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; kim -- what; tat -- that; brahma -- Brahman; kim -- what; adhyatmam -- the
self; kim -- what; karma -- fruitive activities; purusa-uttama -- O Supreme Person; adhibhutam -- the
material manifestation; ca -- and; kim -- what; proktam -- is called; adhidaivam -- the demigods; kim -what; ucyate -- is called.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is the self? What are fruitive
activities? What is this material manifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.
Text 2
Who is the Lord of sacrifice and how does He live within the body, o slayer of Madhu and how, when ones
time has come, can You be known by the selfcontrolled?
SANSKRIT

adhiyajnah katham ko 'tra
dehe 'smin madhusûdana
prayâna-kâle ca katham
jneyo 'si niyatâtmabhih
WORD FOR WORD
adhiyajnah -- the Lord of sacrifice; katham -- how; kah -- who; atra -- here; dehe -- in the body; asmin -this; madhusudana -- O Madhusudana; prayana-kale -- at the time of death; ca -- and; katham -- how;
jneyah asi -- You can be known; niyata-atmabhih -- by the self-controlled.
TRANSLATION
Who is the Lord of sacrifice, and how does He live in the body, O Madhusudana? And how can those
engaged in devotional service know You at the time of death?
Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 1 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
The Supreme Lord said: 'The indestructible Spirit is the transcendental eternal of nature that is called
ones own soul [or true self], it produces the material bodies of the living entities and creation is what is
called fruitive activity.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
aksaram brahma paramam
svabhâvo 'dhyâtmam ucyate
bhûta-bhâvodbhava-karo
visargah karma-samjnitah

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead
said;aksaram -- indestructible; brahma -- Brahman; paramam - transcendental; svabhavah -- eternal nature; adhyatmam -the self; ucyate -- is called; bhuta-bhava-udbhava-karah -producing the material bodies of the living entities; visargah -creation; karma -- fruitive activities; samjnitah -- is called.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The indestructible,
transcendental living entity is called Brahman, and his eternal
nature is called adhyatma, the self. Action pertaining to the
development of the material bodies of the living entities is
called karma, or fruitive activities.

SANSKRIT

Text 4
The constantly changing material nature is the [body of the]
original person of the godly spoken about and the Lord of
sacrifice for sure I am in this body of the embodied, o best
one.

adhibhûtam ksaro bhâvah
purusas câdhidaivatam
adhiyajno 'ham evâtra
dehe deha-bhrtâm vara

WORD FOR WORD
adhibhutam -- the physical manifestation; ksarah -- constantly changing; bhavah -- nature; purusah -- the
universal form, including all the demigods, like the sun and moon; ca -- and; adhidaivatam -- called
adhidaiva; adhiyajnah -- the Supersoul; aham -- I (Krishna); eva -- certainly; atra -- in this; dehe -- body;
deha-bhrtam -- of the embodied; vara -- O best.
TRANSLATION
O best of the embodied beings, the physical nature, which is constantly,changing, is called adhibhuta [the
material manifestation]. The universal form of the Lord, which includes all the demigods, like those of the
sun and moon, is called adhidaiva. And I, the Supreme Lord, represented as the Supersoul in the heart of
every embodied being, am called adhiyajna [the Lord of sacrifice].
Text 5
At the end of ones time it is also surely in the remembrance of Me that he, who goes to quit the body, will
achieve My nature. Of that there is no doubt.
SANSKRIT

anta-kâle ca mâm eva
smaran muktvâ kalevaram
yah prayâti sa mad-bhâvam
yâti nâsty atra samsayah

WORD FOR WORD
anta-kale -- at the end of life; ca -- also; mam -- Me; eva -- certainly; smaran -- remembering; muktva -quitting; kalevaram -- the body; yah -- he who; prayati -- goes; sah -- he; mat-bhavam -- My nature; yati -achieves; na -- not; asti -- there is; atra -- here; samsayah -- doubt.
TRANSLATION
And whoever, at the end of his life, quits his body, remembering Me alone, at once attains My nature. Of
this there is no doubt.
Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 2 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 6
The nature of whatever one is all remembering, giving this vehicle of time up in the end, similar surely
always will lead, o son of Bhârata, to the state which is essential to it.
SANSKRIT

yam yam vâpi smaran bhâvam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sadâ tad-bhâva-bhâvitah

WORD FOR WORD
yam yam -- whatever; va api -- at all; smaran -- remembering; bhavam -- nature; tyajati -- gives up; ante - at the end; kalevaram -- this body; tam tam -- similar; eva -- certainly; eti -- gets; kaunteya -- O son of
Kuntî; sada -- always; tat -- that; bhava -- state of being; bhavitah -- remembering.
TRANSLATION
Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, O son of Kuntî, that state he will attain
without fail.
Text 7
Therefore go on remembering Me at all times and fighting with your mind and intelligence surrendered to
Me, certainly you will attain Me without doubt.
SANSKRIT

tasmât sarvesu kâlesu
mâm anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mâm evais'yasy asamsayah

WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; sarvesu -- at all; kalesu -- times; mam -- Me; anusmara -- go on remembering; yudhya
-- fight; ca -- also; mayi -- unto Me; arpita -- surrendering; manah -- mind; buddhih -- intellect; mam -unto Me; eva -- surely; esyasi -- you will attain; asamsayah -- beyond a doubt.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krishna and at the same time carry out
your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed
on Me, you will attain Me without doubt.
Text 8
Persistently uniting the mind and intelligence in the connectedness of yoga without deviating one achieves
the Supreme Original Person of transcendence, o son of Prithâ, that one is constantly thinking of.
SANSKRIT

abhyâsa-yoga-yuktena
cetasâ nânya-gâminâ
paramam purusam divyam
yâti pârthânucintayan

WORD FOR WORD
abhyasa-yoga -- by practice; yuktena -- being engaged in meditation; cetasa -- by the mind and
intelligence; na anya-gamina -- without their being deviated; paramam -- the Supreme; purusam -Personality of Godhead; divyam -- transcendental; yati -- one achieves; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ;
anucintayan -- constantly thinking of.
TRANSLATION
He who meditates on Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind constantly engaged in
remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, O Prithâ, is sure to reach Me.
Text 9
He is the one who knows all, who is the oldest, the controller, smaller than an atom and is always thinking
of everything; He is the inconceivable maintainer whose form is luminous like the sun and who is
trancendental to all darkness.
SANSKRIT

kavim purânam anusâsitâram
anor anîyâmsam anusmared yah
sarvasya dhâtâram acintya-rûpam
âditya- varnam tamasah parastât

Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 3 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
kavim -- the one who knows everything; puranam -- the oldest; anusasitaram -- the controller; anoh -than the atom; aniyamsam -- smaller; anusmaret -- always thinks of; yah -- one who; sarvasya -- of
everything; dhataram -- the maintainer; acintya -- inconceivable; rupam -- whose form; aditya-varnam -luminous like the sun; tamasah -- to darkness; parastat -- transcendental.
TRANSLATION
One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows everything, as He who is the oldest,
who is the controller, who is smaller than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who is
beyond all material conception, who is inconceivable, and who is always a person. He is luminous like the
sun, and He is transcendental, beyond this material nature.
Text 10
One who, at the end of his time fixes his mind in devotion connected by the strength of yoga and as well
for sure establishes the life air between the eyebrows, achieves that transcendental Original Person of the
divine.
SANSKRIT

prayâna-kâle manasâ'calena
bhaktyâ yukto yoga-balena caiva
bhruvor madhye prânam âvesya samyak
sa tam param purusam upaiti divyam
WORD FOR WORD
prayana-kale -- at the time of death; manasa -- by the mind; acalena -- without its being deviated;
bhaktya -- in full devotion; yuktah -- engaged; yoga-balena -- by the power of mystic yoga; ca -- also; eva
-- certainly; bhruvoh -- the two eyebrows; madhye -- between; pranam -- the life air; avesya -establishing; samyak -- completely; sah -- he; tam -- that; param -- transcendental; purusam -- Personality
of Godhead; upaiti -- achieves; divyam -- in the spiritual kingdom.
TRANSLATION
One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows and, by the strength of yoga, with
an undeviating mind, engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord in full devotion, will certainly
attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Text 11
I will now explain in short to you the practice of the celibate desired by those who enter the renounced
order of life as great sages conversant with the Vedas in exercising the pranava [AUM, the primal mantra].
SANSKRIT

yad aksaram veda-vido vadanti
visanti yad yatayo vîta-râgâh
yad icchanto brahmacaryam caranti
tat te padam sangrahena pravaksye

WORD FOR WORD
yat -- that which; aksaram -- syllable om; veda-vidah -- persons conversant with the Vedas; vadanti -- say;
visanti -- enter; yat -- in which; yatayah -- great sages; vita-ragah -- in the renounced order of life; yat -that which; icchantah -- desiring; brahmacaryam -- celibacy; caranti -- practice; tat -- that; te -- unto
you; padam -- situation; sangrahena -- in summary; pravaksye -- I shall explain.
TRANSLATION
Persons who are learned in the Vedas, who utter omkara and who are great sages in the renounced order
enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one practices celibacy. I shall now briefly explain to you this
process by which one may attain salvation.
Text 12
Controlling the [nine] gates [of the senses], confining the mind to the heart and also fixing the soul's lifeair [the attention] in the head one is situated in the yogic position.
SANSKRIT

sarva-dvârâni samyamya
mano hrdi nirudhya ca
mûrdhny âdhâyâtmanah prânam
âsthito yoga-dhâranâm

WORD FOR WORD
sarva-dvarani -- all the doors of the body; samyamya -- controlling; manah -- the mind; hrdi -- in the
heart; nirudhya -- confining; ca -- also; murdhni -- on the head; adhaya -- fixing; atmanah -- of the soul;
pranam -- the life air; asthitah -- situated in; yoga-dharanam -- the yogic situation.
Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 4 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements. Closing all the doors of the senses
and fixing the mind on the heart and the life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in yoga.
Text 13
Vibrating AUM, the one syllable of the spirit, anyone who remembers Me leaving behind this body achieves
the supreme goal.
SANSKRIT

om ity ekâksaram brahmavyâharan mâm anusmaran
yah prayâti tyajan deham
sa yâti paramâm gatim
WORD FOR WORD
om -- the combination of letters om (omkara); iti -- thus; eka-aksaram -- the one syllable; brahma -absolute; vyaharan -- vibrating; mam -- Me (Krishna); anusmaran -- remembering; yah -- anyone who;
prayati -- leaves; tyajan -- quitting; deham -- this body; sah -- he; yati -- achieves; paramam -- the
supreme; gatim -- destination.
TRANSLATION
After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable om, the supreme combination
of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly reach
the spiritual planets.
Text 14
For the one who is always fixing his mind in remembering Me regularly, I am easy to attain, o son of
Prithâ, for he is regularly engaged in the unification.
SANSKRIT

ananya-cetâh satatam
yo mâm smarati nityasah
tasyâham sulabhah pârtha
nitya-yuktasya yoginah

WORD FOR WORD
ananya-cetah -- without deviation of the mind; satatam -- always; yah -- anyone who; mam -- Me
(Krishna); smarati -- remembers; nityasah -- regularly; tasya -- to him; aham -- I am; su-labhah -- very
easy to achieve; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; nitya -- regularly; yuktasya -- engaged; yoginah -- for the
devotee.
TRANSLATION
For one who always remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son of Prithâ, because of his
constant engagement in devotional service.
Text 15
Born again, achieving Me, the great souls that attain the ultimate perfection never reach where the
temporary and miserable is found.
SANSKRIT

mâm upetya punar janma
duhkhâlayam asâsvatam
nâpnuvanti mahâtmânah
samsiddhim paramâm gatâh
WORD FOR WORD
mam -- Me; upetya -- achieving; punah -- again; janma -- birth; duhkha-alayam -- place of miseries;
asasvatam -- temporary; na -- never; apnuvanti -- attain; maha-atmanah -- the great souls; samsiddhim -perfection; paramam -- ultimate; gatah -- having achieved.
TRANSLATION
After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never return to this temporary world, which
is full of miseries, because they have attained the highest perfection.
Text 16
[From reaching] up to the highest place one returns again to the world, o Arjuna, but having found Me, o
son of Kuntî, one is never born again.
SANSKRIT

âbrahma-bhuvanâl lokâh
punar âvartino'rjuna

Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 5 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

mâm upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate
WORD FOR WORD
a-brahma-bhuvanat -- up to the Brahmaloka planet; lokah -- the planetary systems; punah -- again;
avartinah -- returning; arjuna -- O Arjuna; mam -- unto Me; upetya -- arriving; tu -- but; kaunteya -- O son
of Kuntî; punah janma -- rebirth; na -- never; vidyate -- takes place.
TRANSLATION
From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery wherein
repeated birth and death take place. But one who attains to My abode, O son of Kuntî, never takes birth
again.
Text 17
A thousand ages are included in a day to those who know of the Absolute while the night that similarly
takes a thousand ages is there to the people understanding by day ànd night.
SANSKRIT

sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduh
râtrim yuga-sahasrântâm
te 'ho-râtra-vido janâh

WORD FOR WORD
sahasra -- one thousand; yuga -- millenniums; paryantam -- including; ahah -- day; yat -- that which;
brahmanah -- of Brahma; viduh -- they know; ratrim -- night; yuga -- millenniums; sahasra-antam -similarly, ending after one thousand; te -- they; ahah-ratra -- day and night; vidah -- who understand;
janah -- people.
TRANSLATION
By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together form the duration of Brahma's one day. And such
also is the duration of his night.
Text 18
All living beings [thus] manifest themselves from the unmanifest at the beginning of that day, but at the
fall of the night they are surely [also] all taken in to that which is called the unseen.
SANSKRIT

avyaktâd vyaktayah sarvâh
prabhavanty ahar-âgame
râtry-âgame pralîyante
tatraivâvyakta-samjnake

WORD FOR WORD
avyaktat -- from the unmanifest; vyaktayah -- living entities; sarvah -- all; prabhavanti -- become
manifest; ahah-agame -- at the beginning of the day; ratri-agame -- at the fall of night; praliyante -- are
annihilated; tatra -- into that; eva -- certainly; avyakta -- the unmanifest; samjnake -- which is called.
TRANSLATION
At the beginning of Brahma's day, all living entities become manifest from the unmanifest state, and
thereafter, when the night falls, they are merged into the unmanifest again.
Text 19
The totality of all beings that repeatedly take this birth is annihilated on the arrival of the night and out
of their own, o son of Prithâ, they reappear on the arrival of the day.
SANSKRIT

bhûta-grâmah sa evâyam
bhûtvâ bhûtvâ pralîyate
râtry-âgame 'vasah pârtha
prabhavaty ahar-âgame

WORD FOR WORD
bhuta-gramah -- the aggregate of all living entities; sah -- these; eva -- certainly; ayam -- this; bhutva
bhutva -- repeatedly taking birth; praliyate -- is annihilated; ratri -- of night; agame -- on the arrival;
avasah -- automatically; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ;prabhavati -- is manifest; ahah -- of daytime; agame -- on
the arrival.
TRANSLATION
Again and again, when Brahma's day arrives, all living entities come into being, and with the arrival of
Brahma's night they are helplessly annihilated.
Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 6 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 20
But transcendental to that there is another unseen nature to the unmanifest that upon the annihilation of
all manifestation is never annihilated.
SANSKRIT

paras tasmât tu bhâvo 'nyo
'vyakto 'vyaktât sanâtanah
yah sa sarvesu bhûtesu
nasyatsu na vinasyati

WORD FOR WORD
parah -- transcendental; tasmat -- to that; tu -- but; bhavah -- nature; anyah -- another; avyaktah -unmanifest; avyaktat -- to the unmanifest; sanatanah -- eternal; yah sah -- that which; sarvesu -- all;
bhutesu -- manifestation; nasyatsu -- being annihilated; na -- never; vinasyati -- is annihilated.
TRANSLATION
Yet there is another unmanifest nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to this manifested and
unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that
part remains as it is.
Text 21
It is said that that unseen [the spiritual] is infallible and it is known as the ultimate destination from
which, gaining it, one never returns - that is My supreme abode.
SANSKRIT

avyakto 'ksara ity uktas
tam âhuh paramâm gatim
yam prâpya na nivartante
tad dhâma paramam mama

WORD FOR WORD
ayvaktah -- unmanifested; aksarah -- infallible; iti -- thus; uktah -- is said; tam -- that; ahuh -- is known;
paramam -- the ultimate; gatim -- destination; yam -- which; prapya -- gaining; na -- never; nivartante -come back; tat -- that; dhama -- abode; paramam -- supreme; mama -- My.
TRANSLATION
That which the Vedantists describe as unmanifest and infallible, that which is known as the supreme
destination, that place from which, having attained it, one never returns -- that is My supreme abode.
Text 22
The original person is He in the beyond, o son of Prithâ, who can only be achieved by unalloyed devotion,
within whom all of manifestation exists and by whom everything we can see is pervaded.
SANSKRIT

purusah sa parah pârtha
bhaktyâ labhyas tv ananyayâ
yasyântahsthâni bhûtâni
yena sarvam idam tatam
WORD FOR WORD
purusah -- the Supreme Personality; sah -- He; parah -- the Supreme, than whom no one is greater; Prithâ- O son of Prithâ; bhaktya -- by devotional service; labhyah -- can be achieved; tu -- but; ananyaya -unalloyed, undeviating; yasya -- whom; antah-sthani -- within; bhutani -- all of this material
manifestation; yena -- by whom; sarvam -- all; idam -- whatever we can see; tatam -- is pervaded.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is attainable by unalloyed devotion.
Although He is present in His abode, He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.
Text 23
I shall now describe, o best of the Bhâratas, that time at which different kinds of mystics having departed
attain and for sure to that time do or do not return.
SANSKRIT

yatra kâle tv anâvrttim
âvrttim caiva yoginah
prayâtâ yânti tam kâlam
vaksyâmi bharatarsabha
Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 7 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yatra -- at which; kale -- time; tu -- and; anavrttim -- no return; avrttim -- return; ca -- also; eva -certainly; yoginah -- different kinds of mystics; prayatah -- having departed; yanti -- attain; tam -- that;
kalam -- time; vaksyami -- I shall describe; bharata-rsabha -- O best of the Bhâratas.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bhâratas, I shall now explain to you the different times at which, passing away from this
world, the yogi does or does not come back.
Text 24
Those persons who know the Absolute and leave during the fire of daylight with a waxing moon during the
six months when the sun passes the north, reach the Supreme Spirit.
SANSKRIT

agnir jyotir ahah suklah
san mâsâ uttarâyanam
tatra prayâtâ gacchanti
brahma brahma-vido janâh

WORD FOR WORD
agnih -- fire; jyotih -- light; ahah -- day; suklah -- the white fortnight; sat-masah -- the six months; uttaraayanam -- when the sun passes on the northern side; tatra -- there; prayatah -- those who pass away;
gacchanti -- go; brahma -- to the Absolute; brahma-vidah -- who know the Absolute; janah -- persons.
TRANSLATION
Those who know the Supreme Brahman attain that Supreme by passing away from the world during the
influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment of the day, during the fortnight of the
waxing moon, or during the six months when the sun travels in the north.
Text 25
The mystic who achieves to the light of the moon during the smoke of the night as also with a waning
moon and the six months of the sun passing through the south, comes back.
SANSKRIT

dhûmo râtris tathâ krsnah
san-mâsâ daksinâyanam
tatra cândramasam jyotir
yogî prâpya nivartate
WORD FOR WORD
dhumah -- smoke; ratrih -- night; tatha -- also; krsnah -- the fortnight of the dark moon; sat-masah -- the
six months; daksina-ayanam-- when the sun passes on the southern side; tatra -- there; candramasam -the moon planet; jyotih -- the light; yogi -- the mystic; prapya -- achieving; nivartate -- comes back.
TRANSLATION
The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night, the fortnight of the waning
moon, or the six months when the sun passes to the south reaches the moon planet but again comes back.
Text 26
According the Vedas there are these two ways of [the spiritual] light and darkness [of ignorance] in
passing from this world by which one either does not return or does return again.
SANSKRIT

sukla-krsne gatî hy ete
jagatah sâsvate mate
ekayâ yâty anâvrttim
anyayâvartate punah
WORD FOR WORD
sukla -- light; krsne -- and darkness; gati -- ways of passing; hi -- certainly; ete -- these two; jagatah -- of
the material world; sasvate -- of the Vedas; mate -- in the opinion; ekaya -- by one; yati -- goes; anavrttim
-- to no return; anyaya -- by the other; avartate -- comes back; punah -- again.
TRANSLATION
According to Vedic opinion, there are two ways of passing from this world -- one in light and one in
darkness. When one passes in light, he does not come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.
Text 27
Of knowing any of these different paths, o son of Prithâ, the yogi is never bewildered; therefore always
get unified in yoga, o Arjuna.
Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 8 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

naite srtî pârtha jânan
yogî muhyati kascana
tasmât sarvesu kâlesu
yoga-yukto bhavârjuna
WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; ete -- these two; srti -- different paths; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; janan -- even if he knows;
yogi -- the devotee of the Lord; muhyati -- is bewildered; kascana -- any; tasmat -- therefore; sarvesu
kalesu -- always; yoga-yuktah -- engaged in Krishna consciousness; bhava- just become; arjuna -- O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
Although the devotees know these two paths, O Arjuna, they are never bewildered. Therefore be always
fixed in devotion.
Text 28
The yogîs who know all of this surpass the fruit of pious work as won by vedic study, through sacrifices,
austerities and also surely by giving in charity and achieve the original, supreme abode.
SANSKRIT

vedesu yajnesu tapahsu caiva
dânesu yat punya-phalam pradistam
atyeti tat sarvam idam viditvâ
yogî param sthânam upaiti câdyam
WORD FOR WORD
vedesu -- in the study of the Vedas; yajnesu -- in the performances of yajna, sacrifice; tapahsu -- in
undergoing different types of austerities; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; danesu -- in giving charities; yat -that which; punya-phalam -- result of pious work; pradistam -- indicated; atyeti -- surpasses; tat sarvam -all those; idam -- this; viditva -- knowing; yogi -- the devotee; param -- supreme; sthanam -- abode; upaiti
-- achieves; ca -- also; adyam -- original.
TRANSLATION
A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results derived from studying the
Vedas, performing austere sacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. Simply
by performing devotional service, he attains all these, and at the end he reaches the supreme eternal
abode.

Chapter8 - The Yoga of the Imperishable Spirit

…Page 9 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 9

The Yoga of Confidentiality

On the confidential of knowledge
Text 1
The Supreme Lord said: 'What I am telling now is the most confidential knowledge of selfrealization
[reserved] for those who are not envious. With the knowing of it you will be released from worldly
miseries.
SANSKRIT

srî-bhagavân uvâca
idam tu te guhyatamam
pravaksyâmy anasûyave
jnânam vijnâna-sahitam
yaj jnâtvâ moksyase 'subhât

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam -- this; tu -- but; te -- unto you;
guhya-tamam -- the most confidential; pravaksyami -- I am speaking; anasuyave -- to the nonenvious;
jñânam -- knowledge; vijñâna -- realized knowledge; sahitam -- with; yat -- which; jnatva -- knowing;
moksyase -- you will be released; asubhat -- from this miserable material existence.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of Me, I shall
impart to you this most confidential knowledge and realization, knowing which you shall be relieved of the
miseries of material existence.
Text 2
It is the King of knowledge and the confidential, it is the purest, transcendental and understood by direct
experience, it is of the righteous, very happy in its practice and everlasting.
SANSKRIT

râja-vidyâ râja-guhyam
pavitram idam uttamam
pratyaksâvagamam dharmyam
su-sukham kartum avyayam

WORD FOR WORD
raja-vidya -- the king of education; raja-guhyam -- the king of confidential knowledge; pavitram -- the
purest; idam -- this; uttamam -- transcendental; pratyaksa -- by direct experience; avagamam -understood; dharmyam -- the principle of religion; su-sukham -- very happy; kartum -- to execute;
avyayam -- everlasting.
TRANSLATION
This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and
because it gives direct perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is
everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 1 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
Persons without faith in the path of righteousness, o killer of the enemies, do not attain Me and will upon
dying return to the way of material motivation.
SANSKRIT

asraddadhânâh purusâ
dharmasyâsya parantapa
aprâpya mâm nivartante
mrtyu-samsâra-vartmani

WORD FOR WORD
asraddadhanah -- those who are faithless; purusah -- such persons; dharmasya -- toward the process of
religion; asya -- this; parantapa -- O killer of the enemies; aprapya -- without obtaining; mam -- Me;
nivartante -- come back; mrtyu -- of death; samsara -- in material existence; vartmani -- on the path.
TRANSLATION
Those who are not faithful in this devotional service cannot attain Me, O conqueror of enemies. Therefore
they return to the path of birth and death in this material world.
Text 4
[As said:] By the unmanifest of Me this entire cosmic manifestation is pervaded, all living entities are in
Me and I am not [completely] in them.
SANSKRIT

mayâ tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta-mûrtinâ
mat-sthâni sarva-bhûtâni
na câham tesv avasthitah
WORD FOR WORD
maya -- by Me; tatam -- pervaded; idam -- this; sarvam -- all; jagat -- cosmic manifestation; avyaktamurtina -- by the unmanifested form; mat-sthani -- in Me; sarva-bhutani -- all living entities; na -- not; ca
-- also; aham -- I; tesu -- in them; avasthitah -- situated.
TRANSLATION
By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in
them.
Text 5
Never either is all creation [as such] fixed in Me; behold My mystic union: sustaining all and not being in
them also, is My Self the source of all.
SANSKRIT

na ca mat-sthâni bhûtâni
pasya me yogam aisvaram
bhûta-bhrn na ca bhûta-stho
mamâtmâ bhûta-bhâvanah

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; ca -- also; mat-sthani -- situated in Me; bhutani -- all creation; pasya- just see; me -- My;
yogam aisvaram -- inconceivable mystic power; bhuta-bhrt -- the maintainer of all living entities; na -never; ca -- also; bhuta-sthah -- in the cosmic manifestation; mama -- My; atma -- Self; bhuta-bhavanah -the source of all manifestations.
TRANSLATION
And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the
maintainer of all living entities and although I am everywhere, I am not a part of this cosmic
manifestation, for My Self is the very source of creation.
Text 6
Try to understand that, like the mighty wind that is always in the sky blowing everywhere, I likewise exist
with all created beings that are within Me.
SANSKRIT

Yathâkâsa-sthito nityam
vâyuh sarvatra-go mahân
tathâ sarvâni bhûtâni
mat-sthânîty upadhâraya
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 2 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yatha- just as; akasa-sthitah -- situated in the sky; nityam -- always; vayuh -- the wind; sarvatra-gah -blowing everywhere; mahan -- great; tatha -- similarly; sarvani bhutani -- all created beings; mat-sthani -situated in Me; iti -- thus; upadharaya -- try to understand.
TRANSLATION
Understand that as the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, rests always in the sky, all created beings rest
in Me.
Text 7
All beings, o son of Kuntî, merge at the end of an era in My original form [material nature] and at the
beginning of an era all those I create again.
SANSKRIT

sarva-bhûtâni kaunteya
prakritim yânti mâmikâm
kalpa-ksaye punas tâni
kalpâdau visrjâmy aham

WORD FOR WORD
sarva-bhutani -- all created entities; kaunteya -- O son of Kunti; prakritim -- nature; yanti -- enter;
mamikam -- My; kalpa-ksaye -- at the end of the millennium; punah -- again; tani -- all those; kalpa-adau - in the beginning of the millennium; visrjami -- create; aham -- I.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti, at the end of the millennium all material manifestations enter into My nature, and at the
beginning of another millennium, by My potency, I create them again.
Text 8
Descending into My material nature I again and again create all of the cosmic manifestation of which the
sum total is delivered to My compelling force.
SANSKRIT

prakritim svâm avastabhya
visrjâmi punah punah
bhûta-grâmam imam krtsnam
avasam prakrter vasât

WORD FOR WORD
prakritim -- the material nature; svam -- of My personal Self;avastabhya -- entering into; visrjami -- I
create; punah punah -- again and again; bhuta-gramam -- all the cosmic manifestations; imam -- these;
krtsnam -- in total; avasam -- automatically; prakrteh -- of the force of nature; vasat -- under obligation.
TRANSLATION
The whole cosmic order is under Me. Under My will it is automatically manifested again and again, and
under My will it is annihilated at the end.
Text 9
And to those activities I am never bound, o conqueror of wealth, as I am in the neutral without being
attracted to the fruitive action.
SANSKRIT

na ca mâm tâni karmâni
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
udâsinavad âsînam
asaktam tesu karmasu
WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; ca -- also; mam -- Me; tani -- all those; karmani -- activities; nibadhnanti -- bind; dhananjaya
-- O conqueror of riches; udasina-vat -- as neutral; asinam -- situated; asaktam -- without attraction; tesu
-- for those; karmasu -- activities.
TRANSLATION
O Dhanañjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached from all these material activities, seated
as though neutral.
Text 10
By my superintendence the material of nature manifests both the moving and the unmoving and for this
reason, [for the sake of My being], o son of Kuntî, is the cosmic manifestation working.

Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 3 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

mayâdhyaksena prakritih
sûyate sa-carâcaram
hetunânena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate

WORD FOR WORD
maya -- by Me; adhyaksena -- by superintendence: prakritih -- material nature; suyate -- manifests; sa -both; cara-acaram the moving and the nonmoving; hetuna -- for the reason; anena -- this; kaunteya -- O
son of Kunti; jagat -- the cosmic manifestation; viparivartate -- is working.
TRANSLATION
This material nature, which is one of My energies, is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, producing
all moving and nonmoving beings. Under its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and
again.
Text 11
The foolish look down upon My having assumed the human form, not knowing of My transcendental nature
and that I am the Great Lord of all.
SANSKRIT

avajânanti mâm mûdhâ
mânusîm tanum âsritam
param bhâvam ajânanto
mama bhûta-mahesvaram

WORD FOR WORD
avajananti -- deride; mam -- Me; mudhah -- foolish men; manusim -- in a human form; tanum -- a body;
asritam -- assuming; param -- transcendental; bhavam -- nature; ajanantah -- not knowing; mama -- My;
bhuta -- of everything that be; maha-isvaram -- the supreme proprietor.
TRANSLATION
Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature as the
Supreme Lord of all that be.
Text 12
Baffled in their hopes, fruitive actions and knowledge , take those who are bewildered to demoniac and
atheistic views and also surely to the delusional of material nature [materialism].
SANSKRIT

moghâsâ mogha-karmâno
mogha-jnânâ vicetasah
râksasîm âsurîm caiva
prakritim mohinîm sritâh

WORD FOR WORD
mogha-asah -- baffled in their hopes; mogha-karmanah -- baffled in fruitive activities; mogha-jñânah -baffled in knowledge; vicetasah -- bewildered; raksasim -- demonic; asurim -- atheistic; ca -- and; eva -certainly; prakritim -- nature; mohinim -- bewildering; sritah -- taking shelter of.
TRANSLATION
Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic views. In that deluded condition,
their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities, and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.
Text 13
But the great souls, o son of Prithâ, who have taken to the shelter of My divine nature, render service
without their minds deviating and know of the inexhaustible origin of creation.
SANSKRIT

mahâtmânas tu mâm pârtha
daivîm prakritim âsritâh
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jnâtvâ bhûtâdim avyayam
WORD FOR WORD
maha-atmanah -- the great souls; tu -- but; mam -- unto Me; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; daivim -- divine;
prakritim -- nature; asritah -- having taken shelter of; bhajanti -- render service; ananya-manasah -without deviation of the mind; jnatva -- knowing; bhuta -- of creation; adim -- the origin; avyayam -inexhaustible.

Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 4 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the protection of the divine nature.
They are fully engaged in devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, original and inexhaustible.
Text 14
Always singing about Me and also endeavoring with determination they offer Me their obeisances
perpetually engaged in the worship of their devotion.
SANSKRIT

satatam kîrtayanto mâm
yatantas ca drdha-vratâh
namasyantas ca mâm bhaktyâ
nitya-yuktâ upâsate

WORD FOR WORD
satatam -- always; kirtayantah -- chanting; mam -- about Me; yatantah -- fully endeavoring; ca -- also;
drdha-vratah -- with determination; namasyantah -- offering obeisances; ca -- and; mam -- Me; bhaktya -in devotion; nitya-yuktah -- perpetually engaged; upasate -- worship.
TRANSLATION
Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,bowing down before Me, these great
souls perpetually worship Me with devotion.
Text 15
Also cultivating knowledge others sacrificing worship Me as the oneness in the diversity of the universal
form.
SANSKRIT

jnâna-yajnena câpy anye
yajanto mâm upâsate
ekatvena prithâktvena
bahudhâ visvato-mukham
visvato-mukham

WORD FOR WORD
jñâna-yajnena -- by cultivation of knowledge; ca -- also; api -- certainly; anye -- others; yajantah -sacrificing; mam -- Me; upasate -- worship; ekatvena -- in oneness; prithâktvena -- in duality; bahudha -in diversity; visvatah-mukham -- and in the universal form.
TRANSLATION
Others, who engage in sacrifice by the cultivation of
knowledge, worship the Supreme Lord as the one without a
second, as diverse in many, and in the universal form.
Text 16
I am the ritual, the sacrifice, the oblation and I am the
medicinal herb, the mantra and also for sure the clarified
butter, the fire and the offering.
SANSKRIT

aham kratur aham yajnah
svadhâham aham ausadham
mantro 'ham aham evâjyam
aham agnir aham hutam

WORD FOR WORD
aham -- I; kratuh -- Vedic ritual; aham -- I; yajnah -- smrti
sacrifice; svadha -- oblation; aham -- I; aham -- I; ausadham
-- healing herb; mantrah -- transcendental chant; aham -- I;
aham -- I; eva -- certainly; ajyam -- melted butter; aham -I; agnih -- fire; aham -- I; hutam -- offering.
TRANSLATION
But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to
the ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I
am the butter and the fire and the offering.
Text 17
Of this universe I am the father, the mother, the supporter, the grandfather, that what's to be known ,
that what purifies, the pranava AUM and surely the Rig-, Sâma- and the Yayur-Veda.
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 5 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

pitâham asya jagato
mâtâ dhâtâ pitâmahah
vedyam pavitram omkâra
rk sâma yajur eva ca

WORD FOR WORD
pita -- father; aham -- I; asya -- of this; jagatah -- universe; mata -- mother; dhata -- supporter;
pitamahah -- grandfather; vedyam -- what is to be known; pavitram -- that which purifies; om-kara -- the
syllable om; rk -- the Rg Veda; sama -- the Sama Veda; yajuh -- the Yajur Veda; eva -- certainly; ca -- and.
TRANSLATION
I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support and the grandsire. I am the object of knowledge,
the purifier and the syllable om. I am also the Rg, the Sama and the Yajur Vedas.
Text 18
The goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the refuge, the most intimate friend, the origin, the
dissolution, the ground of being, the resting place and the imperishable seed [I am].
SANSKRIT

gatir bhartâ prabhuh sâksî
nivâsah saranam suhrt
prabhavah pralayah sthânam
nidhânam bîjam avyayam

WORD FOR WORD
gatih -- goal; bharta -- sustainer; prabhuh -- Lord; saksi -- witness; nivasah -- abode; saranam -- refuge;
suhrt -- most intimate friend; prabhavah -- creation; pralayah -- dissolution; sthanam -- ground; nidhanam
-- resting place; bijam -- seed; avyayam -- imperishable.
TRANSLATION
I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the refuge, and the most dear friend. I
am the creation and the annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and the eternal seed.
Text 19
I give heat, I bring and withold the rain and I am immortality and surely death and both the true [the
subtle] and untrue [the gross], Arjuna.
SANSKRIT

tapâmy aham aham varsam
nigrhnâmy utsrjâmi ca
amrtam caiva mrtyus ca
sad asac câham arjuna

WORD FOR WORD
tapami -- give heat; aham -- I; aham -- I; varsam -- rain; nigrhnami -- withhold; utsrjami -- send forth; ca - and; amrtam -- immortality; ca -- and; eva -- certainly; mrtyuh -- death; ca -- and; sat -- spirit; asat -matter; ca -- and; aham -- I; arjuna -- O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
O Arjuna, I give heat, and I withhold and send forth the rain. I am immortality, and I am also death
personified. Both spirit and matter are in Me.
Text 20
The knowers of the three Vedas, these Soma [mixed with clarified butter and fermented acid of a climbing
plant used by the brahmins]-drinkers who are freed from sins, worship Me with sacrifices and pray for
their passage to heaven - they attain the world of Indra [the king of heaven] and enjoy the celestial
pleasures of the gods there.
SANSKRIT

trai-vidyâ mâm soma-pâh pûta-pâpâ
yajnair istvâ svar-gatim prârthayante
te punyam âsâdya surendra-lokam
asnanti divyân divi deva-bhogân
WORD FOR WORD
trai-vidyah -- the knowers of the three Vedas; mam -- Me; soma-pah -- drinkers of soma juice; puta -purified; papah -- of sins; yajnaih -- with sacrifices; istva -- worshiping; svah-gatim -- passage to heaven;
prarthayante -- pray for; te -- they; punyam -- pious; asadya -- attaining; sura-indra -- of Indra; lokam -the world; asnanti -- enjoy; divyan -- celestial; divi -- in heaven; deva-bhogan -- the pleasures of the gods.
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 6 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly.
Purified of sinful reactions, they take birth on the pious, heavenly planet of Indra, where they enjoy godly
delights.
Text 21
After they, taking pleasure in that vast heaven, have exhausted the merit of their good deeds, they fall
back into the mortal world again and thus do those who desire sense-enjoyment in following the doctrines
of the three Vedas attain to birth and death.
SANSKRIT

te tam bhuktvâ svarga-lokam visâlam
ksîne punye martya-lokam visanti
evam trayî-dharmam anuprapannâ
gatâgatam kâma-kâmâ labhante
WORD FOR WORD
te -- they; tam -- that; bhuktva -- enjoying; svarga-lokam -- heaven; visalam -- vast; ksine -- being
exhausted; punye -- the results of their pious activities; martya-lokam -- to the mortal earth; visanti -- fall
down; evam -- thus; trayi -- of the three Vedas; dharmam --doctrines; anuprapannah -- following; gataagatam -- death and birth; kama-kamah -- desiring sense enjoyments; labhante -- attain.
TRANSLATION
When they have thus enjoyed vast heavenly sense pleasure and the results of their pious activities are
exhausted, they return to this mortal planet again. Thus those who seek sense enjoyment by adhering to
the principles of the three Vedas achieve only repeated birth and death.
Text 22
But of those persons who concentrate on nothing else but Me and who are fixed in devotion in proper
worship, I protect the union and to them I carry what they need
SANSKRIT

ananyâs cintayanto mâm
ye janâh paryupâsate
tesâm nityâbhiyuktânâm
yoga-ksemam vahâmy aham
WORD FOR WORD
ananyah -- having no other object; cintayantah -- concentrating; mam -- on Me; ye -- those who; janah -persons; paryupasate -- properly worship; tesam -- of them; nitya -- always; abhiyuktanam -- fixed in
devotion; yoga -- requirements; ksemam -- protection; vahami -- carry; aham -- I.
TRANSLATION
But those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion, meditating on My transcendental form -- to
them I carry what they lack, and I preserve what they have.
Text 23
Even though those who are the devotees of other gods with faith also worship Me only, o son of Kuntî,
they worship Me the wrong way.
SANSKRIT

ye 'py anya-devatâ-bhaktâ
yajante sraddhayânvitâh
te 'pi mâm eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pûrvakam
WORD FOR WORD
ye -- those who; api -- also; anya -- of other; devata -- gods; bhaktah -- devotees; yajante -- worship;
sraddhaya anvitah -- with faith; te -- they; api -- also; mam -- Me; eva -- only; kaunteya -- O son of Kunti;
yajanti -- they worship; avidhi-purvakam -- in a wrong way.
TRANSLATION
Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith actually worship only Me, O son of
Kunti, but they do so in a wrong way.
Text 24
I am certainly of all sacrifices the enjoyer and the controller as well; they who do not know Me in reality
fall down therefore.
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 7 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

aham hi sarva-yajnânâm
bhoktâ ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mâm abhijânanti
tattvenâtas cyavanti te

WORD FOR WORD
aham -- I; hi -- surely; sarva -- of all; yajñânam -- sacrifices; bhokta -- the enjoyer; ca -- and; prabhuh -the Lord; eva -- also; ca -- and; na -- not; tu -- but; mam -- Me; abhijananti -- they know; tattvena -- in
reality; atah -- therefore; cyavanti -- fall down; te -- they.
TRANSLATION
I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do not recognize My true
transcendental nature fall down.
Text 25
[As said:] worshippers of the godly go to the gods, worshipers of the ancestors go to the forefathers, they
who worship spirits go to them and My devotees come to Me.
SANSKRIT

yânti deva-vratâ devân
pitrn yânti pitr-vratâh
bhûtâni yânti bhûteiyâ
yânti mad-yâjino 'pi mâm
WORD FOR WORD
yanti -- go; deva-vratah -- worshipers of demigods; devan -- to the demigods; pitrn -- to the ancestors;
yanti -- go; pitr-vratah -- worshipers of ancestors; bhutani -- to the ghosts and spirits; yanti -- go; bhutaijyah -- worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yanti -- go; mat -- My; yajinah -- devotees; api -- but; mam -unto Me.
TRANSLATION
Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship the ancestors go
to the ancestors; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; and those who
worship Me will live with Me.
Text 26
Whoever offers Me a leaf, a flower, a fruit and water with devotion, that offer brought from the heart by
a soul of good habits I accept.
SANSKRIT

patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktyâ prayacchati
tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
asnâmi prayatâtmanah
WORD FOR WORD
patram -- a leaf; puspam -- a flower; phalam -- a fruit; toyam -- water; yah -- whoever; me -- unto Me;
bhaktya -- with devotion; prayacchati -- offers; tat -- that; aham -- I; bhakti-upahrtam -- offered in
devotion; asnami -- accept; prayata-atmanah -- from one in pure consciousness.
TRANSLATION
If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will accept it.
Text 27
Whatever you do,whatever you eat, whatever you offer, whatever you give away or whatever austerity
you're in, o son of Kuntî, do that as an offering towards Me.
SANSKRIT

yat karosi yad asnâsi
yaj juhosi dadâsi yat
yat tapas yasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam
WORD FOR WORD
yat -- whatever; karosi -- you do; yat -- whatever; asnasi -- you eat; yat -- whatever; juhosi -- you offer;
dadasi -- you give away; yat -- whatever; yat -- whatever; tapas yasi -- austerities you perform; kaunteya - O son of Kunti; tat -- that; kurusva -- do; mat -- unto Me; arpanam -- as an offering.
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 8 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or give away, and whatever austerities you
perform -- do that, O son of Kunti, as an offering to Me.
Text 28
Thus you will be freed from the auspicious and inauspicious consequences of being bound by karma and
liberated in having your mind set on the renunciation in this yoga, you will attainMe.
SANSKRIT

subhâsubha-phalair evam
moksyase karma-bandhanaih
sannyâsa-yoga-yuktâtmâ
vimukto mâm upaisyasi
WORD FOR WORD
subha -- from auspicious; asubha -- and inauspicious; phalaih -- results; evam -- thus; moksyase -- you will
become free; karma -- of work; bandhanaih -- from the bondage; sannyâsa -- of renunciation; yoga -- the
yoga; yukta-atma -- having the mind firmly set on; vimuktah -- liberated; mam -- to Me; upaisyasi -- you
will attain.
TRANSLATION
In this way you will be freed from bondage to work and its auspicious and inauspicious results. With your
mind fixed on Me in this principle of renunciation, you will be liberated and come to Me.
Text 29
I am equal to all living entities, no one is disliked or favored by Me, but those persons who render
transcendental service to Me in devotion are in Me and I also certainly am [partially] in them.
SANSKRIT

samo ham sarva-bhûtesu
na me dvesyo 'sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mâm bhaktyâ
mayi te tesu câpy aham

WORD FOR WORD
samah -- equally disposed; aham -- I; sarva-bhutesu -- to all living entities; na -- no one; me -- to Me;
dvesyah -- hateful; asti -- is; na -- nor; priyah -- dear; ye -- those who; bhajanti -- render transcendental
service; tu -- but; mam -- unto Me; bhaktya -- in devotion; mayi -- are in Me; te -- such persons; tesu -- in
them; ca -- also; api -- certainly; aham -- I
TRANSLATION
I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in
devotion is a friend, is in Me, and,I am also a friend to him.
Text 30
Even if one committing the most abominable action is engaged in devotional service unto Me without
deviation, is he to be considered a saint as he is complete in his determination.
SANSKRIT

api cet sudurâcâro
bhajate mâm ananya-bhâk
sâdhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah

WORD FOR WORD
api -- even; cet -- if; su-duracarah -- one committing the most abominable actions; bhajate -- is engaged
in devotional service; mam -- unto Me; ananya-bhak -- without deviation; sadhuh -- a saint; eva -certainly; sah -- he; mantavyah -- is to be considered; samyak -- completely; vyavasitah -- situated in
determination; hi -- certainly; sah -- he.
TRANSLATION
Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in devotional service he is to be
considered saintly because he is properly situated in his determination.
Text 31
Very soon he becomes righteous and attains lasting peace, o son of Kuntî; do proclaim that my devotee
never perishes!
SANSKRIT

ksipram bhavati dharmâtmâ
sasvac-chântim nigacchati
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 9 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

kaunteya pratijânîhi
na me bhaktah pranasyati
WORD FOR WORD
ksipram -- very soon; bhavati -- becomes; dharma-atma -- righteous; sasvat-santim -- lasting peace;
nigacchati -- attains; kaunteya -- O son of Kunti; pratijanihi -- declare; na -- never; me -- My; bhaktah -devotee; pranasyati -- perishes.
TRANSLATION
He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee
never perishes.
Text 32
And also in particular those who take shelter of Me, o son of Prithâ, who are born from sin, who are
women, of the trading business and also the laborers; even they will attain to the supreme destination.
SANSKRIT

mâm hi pârtha vyapâsritya
ye'pi syuh pâpa-yonayah
striyo vaishyâs tathâ sûdrâs
te'pi yânti parâm gatim

WORD FOR WORD
mam -- of Me; hi -- certainly; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; vyapasritya -- particularly taking shelter; ye -- those
who; api -- also; syuh -- are; papa-yonayah -- born of a lower family; stri yah -- women; vais'yah -mercantile people; tatha -- also; sudrah -- lower-class men; te api -- even they; yanti -- go; param -- to
the supreme; gatim -- destination.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower birth -- women, vais'yas
[merchants] and sudras [workers] -- can attain the supreme destination.
Text 33
What then again [would be true] for righteous brahmins, devotees and saintly rulers who also gained to
this temporary world full of miseries - be in loving service towards Me.
SANSKRIT

kim punar brâhmanâh punyâ
bhaktâ râjarsayas tathâ
anityam asukham lokam
imam prâpya bhajasva mâm
WORD FOR WORD
kim -- how much; punah -- again; brahmanah -- brahmanas; punyah -- righteous; bhaktah -- devotees;
raja-rsayah -- saintly kings; tatha -- also; anityam -- temporary; asukham -- full of miseries; lokam -planet; imam -- this; prapya -- gaining; bhajasva -- be engaged in loving service; mam -- unto Me.
TRANSLATION
How much more this is so of the righteous brahmanas, the devotees and the saintly kings. Therefore,
having come to this temporary, miserable world, engage in loving service unto Me.
Text 34
Always thinking of Me, become My devotee, My worshiper and thus devoted to Me, offering Me obeisances,
your soul will become fully aligned.
SANSKRIT

man-manâ bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yâjî mâm namaskuru
mâm evais'yasi yuktvaivam
âtmâmam mat-parâyanah
WORD FOR WORD
mat-manah -- always thinking of Me; bhava -- become; mat -- My; bhaktah -- devotee; mat -- My; yaji -worshiper; mam -- unto Me; namaskuru -- offer obeisances; mam -- unto Me; eva -- completely; esyasi -you will come; yuktva -- being absorbed; evam -- thus; atmanam -- your soul; mat-parayanah -- devoted to
Me.
TRANSLATION
Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer obeisances to Me and worship Me.
Being completely absorbed in Me,surely you will come to Me.
Chapter9 - The Yoga of Confidentiality

…Page 10 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 10

The Yoga of His Opulence

On His Identity
Text 1
The Supreme Lord said: 'Again indeed, o mighty armed one, just hear My supreme Instruction about that
which to you, who are so dear to Me, I say to your benefit.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
bhûya eva mahâ-bâho
srnu me paramam vacah
yat te 'ham prîyamânâya
vaksyâmi hita-kâmyayâ
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhuyah -- again; eva -- certainly; mahabaho -- O mighty-armed; srnu -- just hear; me -- My; paramam -- supreme; vacah -- instruction; yat -- that
which; te -- to you; aham -- I; priyamanaya -- thinking you dear to Me; vaksyami -- say; hita-kamyaya -- for
your benefit.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Listen again, O mighty-armed Arjuna. Because you are My dear
friend, for your benefit I shall speak to you further, giving knowledge that is better than what I have
already explained.
Text 2
Nor the number of theists, nor the great wise know My origin; I am certainly the source of the godly and
the great sages in all respect.
SANSKRIT

na me viduh sura-ganâh
prabhavam na maharsayah
aham âdir hi devânâm
maharsînâm ca sarvasah
WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; me -- My; viduh -- know; sura-ganah -- the demigods; prabhavam -- origin, opulences; na -never; maha-rsayah -- great sages; aham -- I am; adih -- the origin; hi -- certainly; devanam -- of the
demigods; maha-rsinam -- of the great sages; ca -- also; sarvasah -- in all respects.
TRANSLATION
Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin or opulences, for, in every respect, I am
the source of the demigods and sages.
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 1 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
He who knows Me as the Unborn One without a beginning and also knows Me as the great Lord of the
world, is not deluded among mortals and is delivered from all reactions to sin.
SANSKRIT

yo mâm ajam anâdim ca
vetti loka-mahesvaram
asammûdhah sa martyesu
sarva-pâpaih pramucyate

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- anyone who; mam -- Me; ajam -- unborn; anadim -- without beginning; ca -- also; vetti -- knows;
loka -- of the planets; maha-isvaram -- the supreme master; asammudhah -- undeluded; sah -- he;
martyesu -- among those subject to death; sarva-papaih -- from all sinful reactions; pramucyate -- is
delivered.
TRANSLATION
He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme Lord of all the worlds -- he only,
undeluded among men, is freed from all sins.
Text 4-5
Intelligence, knowledge, composure, forgiveness, truthfulness, control over the senses and the mind,
happiness, sorrow, birth, death, fear and fearlessness also, nonviolence, equilibrium, contentment,
austerity, charity, fame and infamy are the different aspects to the living being that are arranged by Me.
SANSKRIT

buddhir jnânam asammohah
ksamâ satyam damah samah
sukham duhkham bhavo 'bhâvo
bhayam câbhayam eva ca
ahimsâ samatâ tustis
tapo dânam yaso 'yasah
bhavanti bhâvâ bhûtânâm
matta eva prthag-vidhâh

WORD FOR WORD
buddhih -- intelligence; jñânam -- knowledge; asammohah -- freedom from doubt; ksama -- forgiveness;
satyam -- truthfulness; damah -- control of the senses; samah -- control of the mind; sukham -- happiness;
duhkham -- distress; bhavah -- birth; abhavah -- death; bhayam -- fear; ca -- also; abhayam -fearlessness; eva -- also; ca -- and;
ahimsa -- nonviolence; samata -- equilibrium; tustih -- satisfaction; tapah -- penance; danam -- charity;
yasah -- fame; ayasah -- infamy; bhavanti -- come about; bhavah -- natures; bhutanam -- of living entities;
mattah -- from Me; eva -- certainly; prthak-vidhah -- variously arranged.
TRANSLATION
Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness, truthfulness, control of the
senses, control of the mind, happiness and distress, birth, death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence,
equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame and infamy -- all these various qualities of living beings
are created by Me alone.
Text 6
From the mind of the seven great sages [Marîci. Atri, Angirâ, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishthha]
before and the four Manus [the progenitors Svâyambhuva, Svârocisha, Raivata and Uttama] who also stem
from Me, all of the population born in this world has originated.
SANSKRIT

maharsayah sapta pûrve
catvâro manavas tathâ
mad-bhâvâ mânasâ jâtâ
yesâm loka imâh prajâh

WORD FOR WORD
maha-rsayah -- the great sages; sapta -- seven; purve -- before; catvarah -- four; manavah -- Manus; tatha
-- also; mat-bhavah -- born of Me; manasah -- from the mind; jatah -- born; yesam -- of them; loke -- in
the world; imah -- all this; prajah -- population.
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 2 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and the Manus [progenitors of mankind]
come from Me, born from My mind, and all the living beings populating the various planets descend from
them.
Text 7
Anyone who factually knows that all this opulence and unification of consciousness is also of Me, will be
undivided in his engagement of devotional service, of that there is no doubt.
SANSKRIT

etâm vibhûtim yogam ca
mama yo vetti tattvatah
so'vikalpena yogena
yujyate nâtra samsayah

WORD FOR WORD
etam -- all this; vibhutimn -- opulence; yogam -- mystic power; ca -- also; mama -- of Mine; yah -- anyone
who; vetti -- knows; tattvatah -- factually; sah -- he; avikalpena -- without division; yogena -- in
devotional service; yujyate -- is engaged; na -- never; atra -- here; samsayah -- doubt.
TRANSLATION
One who is factually convinced of this opulence and mystic power of Mine engages in unalloyed devotional
service; of this there is no doubt.
Text 8
I am the source of all, from Me everything emanates, thus knowing the intelligent ones with love in their
hearts become devoted to Me.
SANSKRIT

aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartate
iti matvâ bhajante mâm
budhâ bhâva-samanvitâh

WORD FOR WORD
aham -- I; sarvasya -- of all; prabhavah -- the source of generation; mattah -- from Me; sarvam -everything; pravartate -- emanates; iti -- thus; matva -- knowing; bhajante -- become devoted; mam -unto Me; budhah -- the learned; bhava-samanvitah -- with great attention.
TRANSLATION
I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me. The wise who perfectly
know this engage in My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.
Text 9
With the full of their minds and lives set on Me, they enlighten one another talking about Me constantly
and derive contentment and delight therefrom.
SANSKRIT

mad-cittâ mad-gata-prânâ
bodhayantah parasparam
kathayantas ca mâm nityam
tusyanti ca ramanti ca

WORD FOR WORD
mat-cittah -- their minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-pranah -- their lives devoted to Me; bodhayantah - preaching; parasparam -- among themselves; kathayantah -- talking; ca -- also; mam -- about Me; nityam
-- perpetually; tusyanti -- become pleased; ca -- also; ramanti -- enjoy transcendental bliss; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are fully devoted to My service, and they derive
great satisfaction and bliss from always enlightening one another and conversing about Me.
Text 10
To those who are always engaged in the loving ecstasy of devotional service I give that oneness of
intelligence by which they come to Me.
SANSKRIT

tesâm satata-yuktânâm
bhajatâm prîti-pûrvakam
dadâmi buddhi-yogam tam
yena mâm upayânti te
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 3 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
tesam -- unto them; satata-yuktanam -- always engaged; bhajatam -- in rendering devotional service;
priti-purvakam -- in loving ecstasy; dadami -- I give; buddhi-yogam -- real intelligence; tam -- that; yena -by which; mam -- unto Me; upayanti -- come; te -- they.
TRANSLATION
To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can
come to Me.
Text 11
For them surely, to show special mercy, I, situated in their hearts, dispel the darkness born from
ignorance with the shining light of knowledge.
SANSKRIT

tesâm evânukampârtham
aham ajnâna-jam tamah
nâsayâmy âtma-bhâvastho
jnâna-dîpena bhâsvatâ
WORD FOR WORD
tesam -- for them; eva -- certainly; anukampa-artham -- to show special mercy; aham -- I; ajñâna jam -due to ignorance; tamah -- darkness; nasayami -- dispel; atma-bhava -- within their hearts; sthah -situated; jñâna -- of knowledge; dipena -- with the lamp; bhasvata -- glowing.
TRANSLATION
To show them special mercy, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the
darkness born of ignorance.
Text 12-13
Arjuna said: 'The supreme spirit, the supreme abode, the purest of the supreme You are, the original
personality, the transcendental Lord, the unborn One and the greatest. Of You all the great sages among
the godly like Nârada and Asita, Devala and Vyâsa are speaking and indeed You are now explaining it to
me.
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
param brahma param dhâma
pavitram paramam bhavân
purusam sâsvatam divyam
âdi-devam ajam vibhum
âhus tvâm rsayah sarve
devarsir nâradas tathâ
asito devalo vyâsah
svayam caiva bravîsi me
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; param -- supreme; brahma -- truth; param -- supreme; dhama -- sustenance;
pavitram -- pure; paramam -- supreme; bhavan -- You; purusam -- personality; sasvatam -- original;
divyam -- transcendental; adi-devam -- the original Lord; ajam -- unborn; vibhum -- greatest;
ahuh -- say; tvam -- of You; rsayah -- sages; sarve -- all; deva-rsih -- the sage among the demigods;
naradah -- Narada; tatha -- also; asitah -- Asita; devalah -- Devala; vyasah -- Vyasa; svayam -- personally;
ca -- also; eva -- certainly; bravisi -- You are explaining; me -- unto me.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ultimate abode, the purest, the Absolute
Truth. You are the eternal, transcendental, original person, the unborn, the greatest. All the great sages
such as Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa confirm this truth about You, and now You Yourself are declaring
it to me.
Text 14
All this that You have told me, O Krishna, I accept as the truth; surely is this revelation of Your Supreme
Lordship not known by the godly nor by the godless.
SANSKRIT

sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mâm vadasi kesava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
vidur devâ na dânavâh

Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 4 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
sarvam -- all; etat -- this; rtam -- truth; manye -- I accept; yat -- which; mam -- unto me; vadasi -- You
tell; kesava -- O Krishna; na -- never; hi -- certainly; te -- Your; bhagavan -- O Personality of Godhead;
vyaktim -- revelation; viduh -- can know; devah -- the demigods; na -- nor; danavah -- the demons.
TRANSLATION
O Krishna, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither the demigods nor the demons, O
Lord, can understand Your personality.
Text 15
Surely You know Yourself personally by Yourself, O greatest One and origin of all, Lord of all beings, God
of the gods and master of the Universe.
SANSKRIT

svayam evâtmanâtmânam
vettha tvam purusottama
bhûta-bhâvana bhûtesa
deva-deva jagat-pate
WORD FOR WORD
svayam -- personally; eva -- certainly; atmana -- by Yourself; atmanam -- Yourself; vettha -- know; tvam -You; purusa-uttama -- O greatest of all persons; bhuta-bhavana -- O origin of everything; bhuta-isa -- O
Lord of everything; deva-deva -- O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate -- O Lord of the entire universe.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own internal potency, O Supreme Person, origin of all, Lord of all
beings, God of gods, Lord of the universe!
Text 16
For You are the One to tell in detail about the Divine of Your opulences by which, pervading all these
worlds, You remain.
SANSKRIT

vaktum arhasy asesena
divyâ hy âtma-vibhûtayah
yâbhir vibhûtibhir lokân
imâms tvam vyâpya tisthasi

WORD FOR WORD
vaktum -- to say; arhasi -- You deserve; asesena -- in detail; divyah -- divine; hi -- certainly; atma -- Your
own; vibhutayah -- opulences; yabhih -- by which; vibhutibhih -- opulences; lokan -- all the planets; iman - these; tvam -- You; vyapya -- pervading; tisthasi -- remain.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me in detail of Your divine opulences by which You pervade all these worlds.
Text 17
How can I know You, o Yoga, always think of You and in what and what form are You to be remembered
by me, O supreme Lord?
SANSKRIT

katham vidyâm aham yogims
tvâm sadâ paricintayan
kesu kesu ca bhâvesu
cintyo 'si bhagavan mayâ
WORD FOR WORD
katham -- how; vidyam aham -- shall I know; yogin -- O supreme mystic; tvam -- You; sada -- always;
paricintayan -- thinking of; kesu -- in which; kesu -- in which; ca -- also; bhavesu -- natures; cintyah asi -You are to be remembered; bhagavan -- O Supreme; maya -- by me.
TRANSLATION
O Krishna, O supreme mystic, how shall I constantly think of You, and how shall I know You? In what
various forms are You to be remembered, O Supreme Personality of Godhead?
Text 18
O killer of the atheists, what again is the opulence of Your Yoga as I surely cannot hear enough of the
description of the nectar.
SANSKRIT

vistarenâtmano yogam
vibhûtim ca janârdana

Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 5 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

bhûyah kathaya trptir hi
srnvato nâsti me 'mrtam
WORD FOR WORD
vistarena -- in detail; atmanah -- Your; yogam -- mystic power; vibhutim -- opulences; ca -- also; janaardana -- O killer of the atheists; bhuyah -- again; kathaya -- describe; trptih -- satisfaction; hi -certainly; srnvatah -- hearing; na asti -- there is not; me -- my; amrtam -- nectar.
TRANSLATION
O Janardana, again please describe in detail the mystic power of Your opulences. I am never satiated in
hearing about You, for the more I hear the more I want to taste the nectar of Your words.
Text 19
The Supreme Personality said: 'Yes, I will
surely tell you about the divine of My
personal splendor the principal, about the
principal, o best of the Kurus, as there is no
limit to My extent.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
hanta te kathayisyâmi
divyâ hy âtma-vibhûtayah
prâdhânyatah kuru-srestha
nâsty anto vistarasya me
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan
uvaca
-the
Supreme
Personality of Godhead said; hanta -- yes; te
-- unto you; kathayisyami -- I shall speak;
divyah -- divine; hi -- certainly; atmavibhutayah
-personal
opulences;
pradhanyatah -- which are principal; kurusrestha -- O best of the Kurus; na asti -there is not; antah -- limit; vistarasya -- to
the extent; me -- My.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said:
Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous
manifestations, but only of those which are
prominent, O Arjuna, for My opulence is
limitless.
Text 20
I am, o Arjuna, the soul in the heart of all living beings; I am the origin also, the middle and as well
indeed the end of all existing.
SANSKRIT

aham âtmâ gudâkesa
sarva-bhûtâsaya-sthitah
aham âdis ca madhyam ca
bhûtânâm anta eva ca

WORD FOR WORD
aham -- I; atma -- the soul; gudakesa -- O Arjuna; sarva-bhuta -- of all living entities; asaya-sthitah -situated within the heart; aham -- I am; adih -- the origin; ca -- also; madhyam -- middle; ca -- also;
bhutanam -- of all living entities; antah -- end; eva -- certainly; ca -- and.
TRANSLATION
I am the Supersoul, O Arjuna, seated in the hearts of all living entities. I am the beginning, the middle and
the end of all beings.
Text 21
Of the Âdityas [Diti was the daughter of Daksha and wife of Kas'yapa], I am Vishnu, of all the luminaries I
am the radiant sun, Marîci [a prajâpati, a father of mankind, and father of Kas'yapa] of the Maruts [the
flashing gods] I am and of the divisions of the year [the constellations or of what is fixed] I am the Moon.
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 6 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

âdityânâm aham visnur
jyotisâm ravir amsumân
marîcir marutâm asmi
naksatrânâm aham sasî

WORD FOR WORD
adityanam -- of the Âdityas; aham -- I am; visnuh -- the Supreme Lord; jyotisam -- of all luminaries; ravih - the sun; amsu-man -- radiant; maricih -- Marîci; marutam -- of the Maruts; asmi -- I am; naksatranam -of the stars; aham -- I am; sasi -- the moon.
TRANSLATION
Of the Âdityas I am Vishnu, of lights I am the radiant sun, of the Maruts I am Marîci, and among the stars I
am the moon.
Text 22
Of the Vedas I am the Sâma-veda [the songs], of the godly I am Indra [or Vâsava], the king of heaven, of
the senses I am the mind and I am also the living force of all creatures.
SANSKRIT

vedânâm sâma-vedo 'smi
devânâm asmi vâsavah
indriyânâm manas câsmi
bhûtânâm asmi cetanâ
WORD FOR WORD
vedanam -- of all the Vedas; sama-vedah -- the Sama Veda; asmi -- I am; devanam -- of all the demigods;
asmi -- I am; vasavah -- the heavenly king; indriyanam -- of all the senses; manah -- the mind; ca -- also;
asmi -- I am; bhutanam -- of all living entities; asmi -- I am; cetana -- the living force.
TRANSLATION
Of the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the demigods I am Indra, the king of heaven; of the senses I am the
mind; and in living beings I am the living force [consciousness].
Text 23
Of all the Rudras [the dreadful, ones] I am S'iva [or S'ankara]; also am I Vittes'a [the treasurer] of the
Yaksha's [attendents of Kuvera, the heavenly treasurer] and Râkshasa's [the demons], of the Vasu's [the
deities of nature] I am fire and of all the mountains I am mount Meru [the one central to all] as well.
SANSKRIT

rudrânâm sankaras câsmi
vitteso yaksa-raksasâm
vasûnâm pâvakas câsmi
meruh sikharinâm aham

WORD FOR WORD
rudranam -- of all the Rudras; sankarah -- Lord S'iva; ca -- also; asmi -- I am; vitta-isah -- the lord of the
treasury of the demigods; yaksa-raksasam -- of the Yakshas and Râkshasas; vasunam -- of the Vasus;
pavakah -- fire; ca -- also; asmi -- I am; meruh -- Meru; sikharinam -- of all mountains; aham -- I am.
TRANSLATION
Of all the Rudras I am Lord S'iva, of the Yakshas and Râkshasas I am the Lord of wealth [Kuvera], of the
Vasus I am fire [Agni], and of mountains I am Meru.
Text 24
Know Me as the chief of all priests, Brihaspati [the priest of Indra], o son of Prithâ, of all military
commanders I am Kârtikeya [Skanda, the god of war and son of S'iva and Pârvatî] and of all bodies of
water I am the ocean.
SANSKRIT

purodhasâm ca mukhyam mâm
viddhi pârtha brhaspatim
senânînâm aham skandah
sarasâm asmi sâgarah

WORD FOR WORD
purodhasam -- of all priests; ca -- also; mukhyam -- the chief; mam -- Me; viddhi -- understand; Prithâ-- O
son of Prithâ; brhaspatim -- Brhaspati; senaninam -- of all commanders; aham -- I am; skandah -Kârtikeya; sarasam -- of all reservoirs of water; asmi -- I am; sagarah -- the ocean.

Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 7 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Brhaspati. Of generals I am Kârtikeya, and of bodies of
water I am the ocean.
Text 25
Of the great wise I am Bhrighu [one of the ten Maharishis to the first Manu], of the spoken I am the
Pranava, of sacrifices I am japa [mantra-meditation with beads] and of the things immovable I am the
Himalayas.
SANSKRIT

maharsînâm bhrgur aham
girâm asmy ekam aksaram
yajnânâm japa-yajno 'smi
sthâvarânâm himâlayah.

WORD FOR WORD
maha-rsinam -- among the great sages; bhrguh -- Bhrgu; aham -- I am; giram -- of vibrations; asmi -- I am;
ekam aksaram -- pranava; yajñânam -- of sacrifices; japa-yajnah -- chanting; asmi -- I am; sthavaranam -of immovable things; himalayah -- the Himalayan mountains.
TRANSLATION
Of the great sages I am Bhrgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental om. Of sacrifices I am the chanting of
the holy names [japa], and of immovable things I am the Himalayas.
Text 26
Of the trees I am the as'vattha [Banyan or one with no specific property], of all seers among the godly I
am Nârada, of the celestial beings [Gandharvas] I am Cittaratha [the best singer] and of the perfected
ones I am Kapila Muni [a Vishnu avatar, son of Devahûti].
SANSKRIT

as'vatthah sarva-vrksânâm
devarsînâm ca nâradah
gandharvânâm citrarathah
siddhânam kapilo munih
WORD FOR WORD
as'vatthah -- the banyan tree; sarva-vrksanam -- of all trees; deva-rsinam -- of all the sages amongst the
demigods; ca -- and; naradah -- Narada; gandharvanam -- of the citizens of the Gandharva planet;
citrarathah -- Citraratha; siddhanam -- of all those who are perfected; kapilah munih -- Kapila Muni.
TRANSLATION
Of all trees I am the banyan tree, and of the sages among the demigods I am Narada. Of the Gandharvas I
am Citraratha, and among perfected beings I am the sage Kapila.
Text 27
Know Me as Uccaihs'ravâ among the horses who came forth from the churning of the ocean to get the
nectar and as Airâvata among the elephants; among men I am the one at the top [the king].
SANSKRIT

uccaihsravasam asvânâm
viddhi mâm amrtodbhavam
airâvatam gajendrânâm
narânâm ca narâdhipam
WORD FOR WORD
uccaihsravasam -- Uccaihs'ravâ; asvanam -- among horses; viddhi -- know; mam -- Me; amrta-udbhavam -produced from the churning of the ocean; airavatam -- Airavata; gaja-indranam -- of lordly elephants;
naranam -- among human beings; ca -- and; nara-adhipam -- the king.
TRANSLATION
Of horses know Me to be Uccaihs'ravâ, produced during the churning of the ocean for nectar. Of lordly
elephants I am Airiavata, and among men I am the monarch.
Text 28
Of all weapons I am the thunderbolt, of the cows I am the surabhi [the plentiful one] and I am Cupid, the
cause of begetting children; of the serpents I am Vâsuki [with whom the ocean was churned].
SANSKRIT

âyudhânâm aham vajram
dhenûnâm asmi kâmadhuk
prajanas câsmi kandarpah
sarpânâm asmi vâsukih
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 8 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
ayudhanam -- of all weapons; aham -- I am; vajram -- the thunderbolt; dhenunam -- of cows; asmi -- I am;
kama-dhuk -- the surabhi cow; prajanah -- the cause for begetting children; ca -- and; asmi -- I am;
kandarpah -- Cupid; sarpanam -- of serpents; asmi -- I am; vasukih -- Vâsuki.
TRANSLATION
Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi. Of causes for procreation I am Kandarpa,
the god of love, and of serpents I am Vâsuki.
Text 29
Of the Nâgas [the snakelike] I am Ananta [supporting Vishnu], of all aquatics I am [the demigod] Varuna,
of the ancestors I am Aryamâ [an Âditya] and of all the regulators I am also Yama, the controller of death.
SANSKRIT

anantas câsmi nâgânâm
varuno yâdasâm aham
pitrnâm aryamâ câsmi
yamah samyamatâm aham
WORD FOR WORD
anantah -- Ananta; ca -- also; asmi -- I am; naganam -- of the manyhooded serpents; varunah -- the
demigod controlling the water; yadasam -- of all aquatics; aham -- I am; pitrnam -- of the ancestors;
aryama -- Aryamâ; ca -- also; asmi -- I am; yamah -- the controller of death; samyamatam -- of all
regulators; aham -- I am.
TRANSLATION
Of the many-hooded Nâgas I am Ananta, and among the aquatics I am the demigod Varuna. Of departed
ancestors I am Aryamâ, and among the dispensers of law I am Yama, the lord of death.
Text 30
Of the Daityas [non-theist sons of Diti who churned the ocean] I am Prahlâda, of what rules I am the Time,
of the animals the lion and of the birds I am Garuda [Vainateya].
SANSKRIT

prahlâdas câsmi daityânâm
kâlah kalayatâm aham
mrgânâm ca mrgendro 'ham
vainateyas ca paksinâm
WORD FOR WORD
prahladah -- Prahlada; ca -- also; asmi -- I am; daityanam -- of the demons; kalah -- time; kalayatam -- of
subduers; aham -- I am; mrganam -- of animals; ca -- and; mrga-indrah -- the lion; aham -- I am;
vainateyah -- Garuda; ca -- also; paksinam -- of birds.
TRANSLATION
Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlada, among subduers I am time, among beasts I am the
lion, and among birds I am Garuda.
Text 31
Of all that purifies I am the wind, I am Râma [a Vishnu avatar] of the armed ones, of all fish I am the
shark, and also am I of the flowing rivers the Ganges ['the daughter of Jahnu'].
SANSKRIT

pavanah pavatâm asmi
râmah sastra-bhrtâm aham
jhasânâm makaras câsmi
srotasâm asmi jâhnavî

WORD FOR WORD
pavanah -- the wind; pavatam -- of all that purifies; asmi -- I am; ramah -- Rama; sastra-bhrtam -- of the
carriers of weapons; aham -- I am; jhasanam -- of all fish; makarah -- the shark; ca -- also; asmi -- I am;
srotasam -- of flowing rivers; asmi -- I am; jahnavi -- the River Ganges.
TRANSLATION
Of purifiers I am the wind, of the wielders of weapons I am Rama, of fishes I am the shark, and of flowing
rivers I am the Ganges.
Text 32
Of the multitude I am [as said] the beginning, the end and the middle and also I am surely, o Arjuna, the
spiritual knowledge of all education and the dialectic of all argumentation.
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 9 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

sargânâm âdir antas ca
madhyam caivâham arjuna
adhyâtma-vidyâ vidyânâm
vâdah pravadatâm aham

WORD FOR WORD
sarganam -- of all creations; adih -- the beginning; antah -- end; ca -- and; madhyam -- middle; ca -- also;
eva -- certainly; aham -- I am; arjuna -- O Arjuna; adhyatma-vidya -- spiritual knowledge; vidyanam -- of
all education; vadah -- the natural conclusion; pravadatam -- of arguments; aham -- I am.
TRANSLATION
Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the
spiritual science of the self, and among logicians I am the conclusive truth.
Text 33
Of the letters I am the first one [the A], of the compound words I am the dual one and certainly am I the
eternal of Time and the Creator facing all directions [Brahmâ].
SANSKRIT

aksarânâm akâro 'smi
dvandvah sâmâsikasya ca
aham evâksayah kâlo
dhâtâham visvato-mukhah
WORD FOR WORD
aksaranam -- of letters; a-karah -- the first letter; asmi -- I am; dvandvah -- the dual; samasikasya -- of
compounds; ca -- and; aham -- I am; eva -- certainly; aksayah -- eternal; kalah -- time; dhata -- the
creator; aham -- I am; visvatah-mukhah -- Brahma.
TRANSLATION
Of letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual compound. I am also inexhaustible
time, and of creators I am Brahma.
Text 34
I am as well the all-devouring death and generation to that what is predestined and fame, beauty and fine
speech I am of women as also memory, intelligence, firmness and patience.
SANSKRIT

mrtyuh sarva-haras câham
udbhavas ca bhavisyatâm
kîrtih srîr vâk ca nârînâm
smrtir medhâ dhrtih ksamâ
WORD FOR WORD
mrtyuh -- death; sarva-harah -- all-devouring; ca -- also; aham -- I am; udbhavah -- generation; ca -- also;
bhavisyatam -- of future manifestations; kirtih -- fame; srih -- opulence or beauty; vak -- fine speech; ca -also; narinam -- of women; smrtih -- memory; medha -- intelligence; dhrtih -- firmness; ksama -- patience.
TRANSLATION
I am all-devouring death, and I am the generating principle of all that is yet to be. Among women I am
fame, fortune, fine speech, memory, intelligence, steadfastness and patience.
Text 35
Of the Sâma-veda-hymns I am the Brihat-sâma [the metrical], of all poetry I am the Gâyatrî [a purification
mantra], of the months I am the one in Sagittarius and of all seasons I am the spring.
SANSKRIT

brhat-sâma tathâ sâmnâm
gâyatrî chandasâm aham
mâsânâm mârga-sîrso 'ham
rtûnâm kusumâkarah

WORD FOR WORD
brhat-sama -- the Krhat-sama; tatha -- also; samnam -- of the Sama Veda songs; gayatri -- the Gayatri
hymns; chandasam -- of all poetry; aham -- I am; masanam -- of months; marga-sirsah -- the month of
November-December; aham -- I am; rtunam -- of all seasons; kusuma-akarah -- spring.
TRANSLATION
Of the hymns in the Sama Veda I am the Brhat-sama, and of poetry I am the Gayatri. Of months I am
Margasirsa [November-December], and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 10 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 36
Of the fallacious I am the gambling, I am the splendor of everything splendid, I am the victory of all
adventure and the strength of the strong I am.
SANSKRIT

dyûtam chalayatâm asmi
tejas teiasvinâm aham
jayo 'smi vyavasâyo 'smi
sattvam sattvavatâm aham

WORD FOR WORD
dyutam -- gambling; chalayatam -- of all cheats; asmi -- I am; tejah -- the splendor; tejasvinam -- of
everything splendid; aham -- I am; jayah -- victory; asmi -- I am; vyavasayah -- enterprise or adventure;
asmi -- I am; sattvam -- the strength; sattva-vatam -- of the strong; aham -- I am.
TRANSLATION
I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and
I am the strength of the strong.
Text 37
Of the Vrishnis I am Vâsudeva [Krishna], of the Pândavas I am Arjuna, of the sages I am Vyâsa [the
compiler of the Vedas] and of all great thinkers I am Usanâ [the teacher of the atheists].
SANSKRIT

vrsnînâm vâsudevo 'smi
pândavânâm dhananjayah
munînâm apy aham vyâsah
kavînâm usanâ kavih

WORD FOR WORD
vrsninam -- of the descendants of Vrsni; vâsudevah -- Krishna in Dvaraka; asmi -- I am; pandavanam -- of
the Pandavas; dhananjayah -- Arjuna; muninam -- of the sages; api -- also; aham -- I am; vyasah -- Vyasa,
the compiler of all Vedic literature; kavinam -- of all great thinkers; usana -- Usana; kavih -- the thinker.
TRANSLATION
Of the descendants of Vrsni I am Vâsudeva, and of the Pandavas I am Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyasa, and
among great thinkers I am Usana.
Text 38
Of the means of suppression I am the clout, I am the morality of those who seek victory, the silence I am
of all secrets, and of the wise I am the knowledge.
SANSKRIT

dando damayatâm asmi
nîtir asmi jigîsatâm
maunam caivâsmi guhyânâm
jnânam jnânavatâm aham
WORD FOR WORD
dan. dah -- punishment; damayatam -- of all means of suppression; asmim-- I am; nitih -- morality; asmi -I am; jigisatam -- of those who seek victory; maunam -- silence; ca -- and; eva -- also; asmi -- I am;
guhyanam -- of secrets; jñânam -- knowledge; jñâna-vatam -- of the wise; aham -- I am.
TRANSLATION
Among all means of suppressing lawlessness I am punishment, and of those who seek victory I am morality.
Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I am the wisdom.
Text 39
Of whatever that of all the beings may exist I am the source, O Arjuna; nothing of the moving and
unmoving exists without Me.
SANSKRIT

yac câpi sarva-bhûtânâm
bîjam tad aham arjuna
na tad asti vinâ yat syân
mayâ bhûtam carâcaram
WORD FOR WORD
yat -- whatever; ca -- also; api -- may be; sarva-bhutanam -- of all creations; bijam -- seed; tat -- that;
aham -- I am; arjuna -- O Arjuna; na -- not; tat -- that; asti -- there is; vina -- without; yat -- which; syat -exists; maya -- Me; bhutam -- created being; cara-acaram -- moving and nonmoving.
Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 11 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences. There is no being -- moving or
nonmoving -- that can exist without Me.
Text 40
There is no limit to my divine opulences, o conqueror of the enemies, all this I spoke of is but an example
of the expanse of My wealth.
SANSKRIT

nânto 'sti mama divyânâm
vibhûtînâm parantapa
esa tûddesatah prokto
vibhûter vistaro mayâ
WORD FOR WORD
na -- nor; antah -- a limit; asti -- there is; mama -- My; divyanam -- of the divine; vibhutinam -- opulences;
parantapa -- O conqueror of the enemies; esah -- all this; tu -- but; uddesatah -- as examples; proktah -spoken; vibhuteh -- of opulences; vistarah -- the expanse; maya -- by Me.
TRANSLATION
O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine manifestations. What I have spoken to you is
but a mere indication of My infinite opulences.
Text 41
Whatever of power that has existence and is of beauty and glory indeed, all those you must certainly know
as being born as a part of My splendor.
SANSKRIT

yad yad vibhûtimat sattvam
srîmad ûrjitam eva vâ
tat tad evâvagaccha tvam
mama tejo-'msa-sambhavam

WORD FOR WORD
yat yat -- whatever; vibhuti -- opulences; mat -- having; sattvam -- existence; sri-mat -- beautiful; urjitam
-- glorious; eva -- certainly; va -- or; tat tat -- all those; eva -- certainly; avagaccha -- must know; tvam -you; mama -- My; tejah -- of the splendor; amsa -- a part; sambhavam -- born of.
TRANSLATION
Know that all opulent, beautiful and glorious creations spring from but a spark of My splendor.
Text 42
But what of your knowing the many of this, o Arjuna, by one part I am in the position of pervading the
entirety of this universe.
SANSKRIT

athavâ bahunaitena
kim jnâtena tavârjuna
vistabhyâham idam krtsnam
ekâmsena sthito jagat
WORD FOR WORD
atha va -- or; bahuna -- many; etena -- by this kind; kim -- what; jnatena -- by knowing; tava -- your;
arjuna -- O Arjuna; vistabhya -- pervading; aham -- I; idam -- this; krtsnam -- entire; eka -- by one;
amsena -- part; sthitah -- am situated; jagat -- universe.
TRANSLATION
But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single fragment of Myself I pervade
and support this entire universe.

Chapter10 - The Yoga of His Opulence

…Page 12 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 11

The Yoga of the Universal Form

On the confrontation with the complete of His reality
Text 1
Arjuna said: 'The words that You spoke in Your favoring me concerning the confidential subject of the
spiritual supreme - through them this illusion of mine is removed.
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
mad-anugrahâya paramam
guhyam adhyâtma-samjnitam
yat tvayoktam vacas tena
moho 'yam vigato mama

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; mat-anugrahaya- just to show me favor; paramam -- supreme; guhyam -confidential subject; adhyatma -- spiritual; samjnitam -- in the matter of; yat -- what; tvaya -- by You;
uktam -- said; vacah -- words; tena -- by that; mohah -- illusion; ayam -- this; vigatah -- is removed; mama
-- my.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: By my hearing the instructions You have kindly given me about these most confidential
spiritual subjects, my illusion has now been dispelled.
Text 2
I heard from You in detail about the appearance and disappearance of all living entities, o lotus eyed one,
and also about Your inexhaustible glories.
SANSKRIT

bhavâpyayau hi bhûtânâm
srutau vistaraso mayâ
tvattah kamala-patrâksa
mâhâtmyam api câvyayam

WORD FOR WORD
bhava -- appearance; apyayau -- disappearance; hi -- certainly; bhutanam -- of all living entities; srutau -have been heard; vistarasah -- in detail; maya -- by me; tvattah -- from You; kamala-patra-aksa -- O lotuseyed one; mahatmyam -- glories; api -- also; ca -- and; avyayam -- inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance and disappearance of every living
entity and have realized Your inexhaustible glories.
Text 3
Even when You have spoken about this of Yours as it is, o Supreme Lord, I wish to see Your divine form, o
Highest Personality.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 1 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

evam etad yathâttha
tvam âtmânam paramesvara
drastum icchâmi te rûpam
aisvaram purusottama

WORD FOR WORD
evam -- thus; etat -- this; yatha -- as it is; attha -- have spoken; tvam -- You; atmanam -- Yourself;
parama-isvara -- O Supreme Lord; drastum -- to see; icchami -- I wish; te -- Your; rupam -- form; aisvaram
-- divine; purusa-uttama -- O best of personalities.
TRANSLATION
O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see You here before me in Your actual position,
as You have described Yourself, I wish to see how You have entered into this cosmic manifestation. I want
to see that form of Yours.
Text 4
If You think that it as such can be seen by me o master, Lord of Yoga, then You show me Your universal
Self.'
SANSKRIT

manyase yadi tac chakyam
mayâ drastum iti prabho
yogesvara tato me tvam
darsayâtmânam avyayam

WORD FOR WORD
manyase -- You think; yadi -- if; tat -- that; sakyam -- is able; maya -- by me; drastum -- to be seen; iti -thus; prabho -- O Lord; yoga-isvara -- O Lord of all mystic power; tatah -- then; me -- unto me; tvam -You; darsaya -- show; atmanam -- Your Self; avyayam -- eternal.
TRANSLATION
If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O master of all mystic power, then
kindly show me that unlimited universal Self.
Text 5
The Supreme Lord said: 'O son of Prithâ, behold the hundreds and thousands of the variegated divine of My
diverse forms and colors.
SANSKRIT

srî-bhagavân uvâca
pasya me pârtha rûpâni
sataso 'tha sahasrasah
nânâ-vidhâni divyâni
nânâ-varnâkrtîni ca

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pasya- just see; me -- My; Prithâ-- O son
of Prithâ; rupani -- forms; satasah -- hundreds; atha -- also; sahasrasah -- thousands; nana-vidhani -variegated; divyani -- divine; nana -- variegated; varna -- colors; akrtini -- forms; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Prithâ, see now My opulences,
hundreds of thousands of varied divine and multicolored forms.
Text 6
Just see the [twelve] Âditiyas, [eight]Vasus, [eleven] Rudra's, [two] As'vins [ demigods for the longevity] ,
[fourty-nine] Maruts as also the many of all the wonders you did not see before, o best of the Bhâratas.
SANSKRIT

pasyâdityân vasûn rudrân
asvinau marutas tathâ
bahûny adrsta-pûrvâni
pasyâscaryâni bhârata
WORD FOR WORD
pasya -- see; adityan -- the twelve sons of Aditi; vasun -- the eight Vasus; rudran -- the eleven forms of
Rudra; asvinau -- the two As'vinis; marutah -- the forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tatha -- also;
bahuni -- many; adrsta -- that you have not seen; purvani -- before; pasya -- see; ascaryani -- all the
wonders; bharata -- O best of the Bhâratas.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 2 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
O best of the Bhâratas, see here the different manifestations of Âdityas, Vasus, Rudras, As'vini-kumaras
and all the other demigods. Behold the many wonderful things which no one has ever seen or heard of
before.
Text 7
See here and now the universe completely, all at the same time, with all that moves and not moves, in
this body of Mine, o conqueror of sleep, and also whatever else you wish to see.
SANSKRIT

ihaika-stham jagat krtsnam
pasyâdya sa-carâcaram
mama dehe gudâkesa
yac cânyad drastum icchasi

WORD FOR WORD
iha -- in this; eka-stham -- in one place; jagat -- the universe; krtsnam -- completely; pasya -- see; adya -immediately; sa -- with;cara -- the moving; acaram -- and not moving; mama -- My; dehe -- in this body;
gudakesa -- O Arjuna; yat -- that which; ca -- also; anyat -- other; drastum -- to see; icchasi -- you wish.
TRANSLATION
O Arjuna, whatever you wish to see, behold at once in this body of Mine! This universal form can show you
whatever you now desire to see and whatever you may want to see in the future. Everything -- moving and
nonmoving -- is here completely, in one place.
Text 8
But certainly you will never be able to see Me with your normal eyes; divine eyes I give you to perceive My
Divine Union.'
SANSKRIT

na tu mâm sakyase drastum
anenaiva sva-caksusâ
divyam dadâmi te caksuh
pasya me yogam aisvaram

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; tu -- but; mam -- Me; sakyase -- are able; drastum -- to see; anena -- with these; eva -certainly; sva-caksusa -- your own eyes; divyam -- divine; dadami -- I give; te -- to you; caksuh -- eyes;
pasya -- see; me -- My; yogam aisvaram -- inconceivable mystic power.
TRANSLATION
But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you divine eyes. Behold My mystic
opulence!
Text 9
Sañjaya said: "O King, after having spoken thus, the Great Lord of Yoga, the Supreme Personality, showed
Arjuna the beyond of the Universal Form.
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
evam uktvâ tato râjan
mahâ-yogesvaro harih
darsayâmâsa pârthâya
paramam rûpam aisvaram

WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; evam -- thus; uktva -- saying; tatah -- thereafter; rajan -- O King; mahayoga-isvarah -- the most powerful mystic; harih -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna; darsayam
asa -- showed; Prithâ ya -- unto Arjuna; paramam -- the divine; rupam aisvaram -- universal form.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said: O King, having spoken thus, the Supreme Lord of all mystic power, the Personality of
Godhead, displayed His universal form to Arjuna.
Text 10-11
Many mouths, eyes and many diverse wonderful sights, many divine ornaments, and a variety of uplifted
weapons, heavenly garlands, the wear of dresses with divine fragrances and ointments, were all wonderful
and shining, extending to all sides.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 3 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekâdbhuta-darsanam
aneka-divyâbharanam
divyânekodyatâyudham
divya-mâlyâmbara-dharam
divya-gandhânulepanam
sarvâscaryamayam devam
anantam visvato-mukham
WORD FOR WORD
aneka -- various; vaktra -- mouths; nayanam -- eyes; aneka -- various; adbhuta -- wonderful; darshanam -sights; aneka -- many; divya -- divine; abharanam -- ornaments; divya -- divine; aneka -- various; udyata -uplifted; ayudham -- weapons;
divya -- divine; malya -- garlands; ambara -- dresses; dharam -- wearing; divya -- divine; gandha -fragrances; anulepanam -- smeared with; sarva -- all; ascarya-mayam -- wonderful; devam -- shining;
anantam -- unlimited; visvatah-mukham -- all-pervading.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths, unlimited eyes, unlimited wonderful visions. The
form was decorated with many celestial ornaments and bore many divine upraised weapons. He wore
celestial garlands and garments, and many divine scents were smeared over His body. All was wondrous,
brilliant, unlimited, all-expanding.
Text 12
If there were the light of the simultaneous presence of many thousands of suns in the sky, such might
resemble the effulgence of Him, the Greatness of the Soul.
SANSKRIT

divi sûrya-sahasrasya
bhaved yugapad utthitâ
yadi bhâh sadrsî sâ syâd
bhâsas tasya mahâtmanah
WORD FOR WORD
divi -- in the sky; surya -- of suns; sahasrasya -- of many thousands; bhavet -- there were; yugapat -simultaneously; utthita -- present; yadi -- if; bhah -- light; sadrsi -- like that; sa -- that; syat -- might be;
bhasah -- effulgence; tasya -- of Him; maha-atmanah -- the great Lord.
TRANSLATION
If hundreds of thousands of suns were to rise at once into the sky, their radiance might resemble the
effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal form.
Text 13
There Arjuna then could, in the universal form of the God of Gods, see in one the complete universe
divided in many.
SANSKRIT

atraika-stham jagat krtsnam
pravibhaktam anekadhâ
apasyad deva-devasya
sarîre pândavas tadâ

WORD FOR WORD
tatra -- there; eka-stham -- in one place; jagat -- the universe; krtsnam -- complete; pravibhaktam -divided; anekadha -- into many; apasyat -- could see; deva-devasya -- of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sarire -- in the universal form; pandavah -- Arjuna; tada -- at that time.
TRANSLATION
At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the unlimited expansions of the universe
situated in one place although divided into many, many thousands.
Text 14
Thereafter, being overwhelmed with wonder and his hair standing on end, the conqueror of wealth
offered the God with folded hands his obeisances, bowing his head and began to speak.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 4 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

tatah sa vismayâvisto
hrsta-româ dhananjayah
pranamya sirasâ devam
krtânjalir abhâsata
WORD FOR WORD
tatah -- thereafter; sah -- he; vismaya-avistah -- being overwhelmed with wonder; hrsta-roma -- with his
bodily hairs standing on end due to his great ecstasy; dhananjayah -- Arjuna; pranamya -- offering
obeisances; sirasa -- with the head; devam -- to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krta-anjalih -- with
folded hands; abhasata -- began to speak.
RANSLATION
Then, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna bowed his head to offer obeisances and
with folded hands began to pray to the Supreme Lord.
Text 15
Arjuna said: 'I see all the gods and all living entities
assembled in Your body, o Lord; Lord Brahmâ seated
on the lotus and Lord S'iva, and also the great sages
and all serpents.
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
pasyâmi devâms tava deva dehe
sarvâms tathâ bhûta-visesa-sanghân
brahmânam îsam kamalâsana-stham
rsîms ca sarvân uragâms ca divyân
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; pasyami -- I see; devan
-- all the demigods; tava -- Your; deva -- O Lord;
dehe -- in the body; sarvan -- all; tatha -- also;
bhuta -- living entities; visesa-sanghan -- specifically
assembled; brahmanam -- Lord Brahma; isam -- Lord
S'iva; kamala-asana-stham -- sitting on the lotus
flower; rsin -- great sages; ca -- also; sarvan -- all;
uragan -- serpents; ca -- also; divyan -- divine.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Lord Krishna, I see assembled
in Your body all the demigods and various other
living entities. I see Brahma sitting on the lotus
flower, as well as Lord S'iva and all the sages and
divine serpents.
Text 16
Many arms, trunks, mouths and eyes I see, on all sides I see an unlimited form with no end, no middle nor
again Your beginning, o Lord of the Universe, o Universal Form.
SANSKRIT

aneka-bâhûdara-vaktra-netram
pasyâmi tvâm sarvato 'nanta-rûpam
nântam na madhyam na punas tavâdim
pasyâmi visvesvara visva-rûpa

WORD FOR WORD
aneka -- many; bahu -- arms; udara -- bellies; vaktra -- mouths; netram -- eyes; pasyami -- I see; tvam -You; sarvatah -- on all sides; ananta-rupam -- unlimited form; na antam -- no end; na madhyam -- no
middle; na punah -- nor again; tava -- Your; adim -- beginning; pasyami -- I see; visva-isvara -- O Lord of
the universe; visva-rupa -- in the form of the universe.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of the universe, O universal form, I see in Your body many, many arms, bellies, mouths and eyes,
expanded everywhere, without limit. I see in You no end, no middle and no beginning.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 5 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 17
With crowns, maces and discs and an effulgence on all sides I have difficulty seeing you glowing
everywhere as the immeasurable blazing fire of the radiating sun.
SANSKRIT

kirîtinam gadinam cakrinam ca
tejorâsim sarvato dîptimantam
pasyâmi tvâm durnirîksyam samantâd
dîptânalârka-dyutim aprameyam

WORD FOR WORD
kiritinam -- with helmets; gadinam -- with maces; cakrinam -- with discs; ca -- and; tejah-rasim -effulgence; sarvatah -- on all sides; dipti-mantam -- glowing; pasyami -- I see; tvam -- You; durniriksyam -difficult to see; samantat -- everywhere; dipta-anala -- blazing fire; arka -- of the sun; dyutim -- the
sunshine; aprameyam -- immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
Your form is difficult to see because of its glaring effulgence, spreading on all sides, like blazing fire or
the immeasurable radiance of the sun. Yet I see this glowing form everywhere, adorned with various
crowns, clubs and discs.
Text 18
You are to be understood as the Infallible Supreme of this universe, You are the basis of the beyond, You
are the inexhaustible maintainer of all religion and the eternal Original Personality You are -that is what I
think.
SANSKRIT

tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam
tvam asya visvasya param nidhânam
tvam avyayah sâsvata-dharma-goptâ
sanâtanas tvam puruso mato me

WORD FOR WORD
tvam -- You; aksaram -- the infallible; paramam -- supreme; veditavyam -- to be understood; tvam -- You;
asya -- of this; visvasya -- universe; param -- supreme; nidhanam -- basis; tvam -- You; avyayah -inexhaustible; sasvata-dharma-gopta -- maintainer of the eternal religion; sanatanah -- eternal; tvam -You; purusah -- the Supreme Personality; matah me -- this is my opinion.
TRANSLATION
You are the supreme primal objective. You are the ultimate resting place of all this universe. You are
inexhaustible, and You are the oldest. You are the maintainer of the eternal religion, the Personality of
Godhead. This is my opinion.
Text 19
Without a beginning, middle or end, of unlimited glories, with countless arms and with the sun and moon
for eyes, I see that by Your radiance out of Your mouth a blazing fire comes that heats this Universe.
SANSKRIT

anâdi-madhyântam ananta-vîryam
ananta-bâhum s'as'i-sûrya-netram
pas'yâmi tvâm dîpta-hutâs'a-vaktram
sva-tejasâ visvam idam tapantam
WORD FOR WORD
anadi -- without beginning; madhya -- middle; antam -- or end; ananta -- unlimited; viryam -- glories;
ananta -- unlimited; bahum -- arms; sasi -- the moon; surya -- and sun; netram -- eyes; pasyami -- I see;
tvam -- You; dipta -- blazing; hutasa-vaktram -- fire coming out of Your mouth; sva-tejasa -- by Your
radiance; visvam -- universe; idam -- this; tapantam -- heating.
TRANSLATION
You are without origin, middle or end. Your glory is unlimited. You have numberless arms, and the sun and
moon are Your eyes. I see You with blazing fire coming forth from Your mouth, burning this entire universe
by Your own radiance.
Text 20
For sure all that is between heaven and earth is pervaded by You alone and by seeing all this of Your
wonderful form in all directions, the three worlds are trembling, o Great Soul.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 6 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

dyâv âprthivyor idam antaram hi
vyâptam tvayaikena disas ca sarvâh
drstvâdbhutam rûpam ugram tavedam
loka-trayam pravyathitam mahâtman
WORD FOR WORD
dyau -- from outer space; a-prthivyoh -- to the earth; idam -- this; antaram -- between; hi -- certainly;
vyaptam -- pervaded; tvaya -- by You; ekena -- alone; disah -- directions; ca -- and; sarvah -- all; drstva -by seeing; adbhutam -- wonderful; rupam -- form; ugram -- terrible; tava -- Your; idam -- this; loka -- the
planetary systems; trayam -- three; pravyathitam -- perturbed; maha-atman -- O great one.
TRANSLATION
Although You are one, You spread throughout the sky and the planets and all space between. O great one,
seeing this wondrous and terrible form, all the planetary systems are perturbed.
Text 21
The host of theists for certain enter You while some of them out of fear are offering prayers with folded
hands. The great sages in that exclaim 'all Hail' and the perfected groupwise pray to You by singing hymns.
SANSKRIT

amî hi tvâm sura-sanghâ visanti
kecid bhîtâh prânjalayo grnanti
svastîty uktvâ maharsi-siddha-sanghâh
stuvanti tvâm stutibhih puskalâbhih

WORD FOR WORD
ami -- all those; hi -- certainly; tvam -- You; sura-sanghah -- groups of demigods; visanti -- are entering;
kecit -- some of them; bhitah -- out of fear; pranjalayah -- with folded hands; grnanti -- are offering
prayers; svasti -- all peace; iti -- thus; uktva -- speaking; maha-rsi -- great sages; siddha-sanghah -- perfect
beings; stuvanti -- are singing hymns; tvam -- unto You; stutibhih -- with prayers; puskalabhih -- Vedic
hymns.
TRANSLATION
All the hosts of demigods are surrendering before You and entering into You. Some of them, very much
afraid, are offering prayers with folded hands. Hosts of great sages and perfected beings, crying "All
peace!" are praying to You by singing the Vedic hymns.
Text 22
The terryfying ones (Rudra's), the godly (Âditya's), the rulers of the elements (Vasus), all those and the
refined (Sâdhya's), the virtuous (Vis'vadevas) , the elderly (of the As'vins), the flashing ones (Maruts), the
forefathers and the celestial beings (Gandharva's); the spirits (Yaksha's), atheists (Asura's) and the whole
gathering of perfected devotees (Siddha's) are certainly beholding You all in awe and wonder.
SANSKRIT

rudrâdityâ vasavo ye ca sâdhyâ
visve 'svinau marutas cosmapâs ca
gandharva-yaksâsura-siddha-sanghâ
vîksante tvâm vismitâs caiva sarve

WORD FOR WORD
rudra -- manifestations of Lord S'iva; adityah -- the Âdityas; vasavah -- the Vasus; ye -- all those; ca -- and;
sadhyah -- the Sâdhyas; visve -- the Vis'vadevas; asvinau -- the As'vini-kumaras; marutah -- the Maruts; ca - and; usma-pah -- the forefathers; ca -- and; gandharva -- of the Gandharvas; yaksa -- the Yakshas; asura
-- the demons; siddha -- and the perfected demigods; sanghah -- the assemblies; viksante -- are beholding;
tvam -- You; vismitah -- in wonder; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; sarve -- all.
TRANSLATION
All the various manifestations of Lord S'iva, the Âdityas, the Vasus, the Sâdhyas, the Vis'vadevas, the two
Asvis, the Maruts, the forefathers, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras and the perfected demigods
are beholding You in wonder.
Text 23
Seeing this unimaginably great form of You with its many faces and eyes, o mighty armed one; its many
arms, thighs and legs; its many bellies and many dreadful teeth, are all the worlds perturbed just as I am.
SANSKRIT

rûpam mahat te bahu-vaktra-netram
mahâ-bâho bahu-bâhûru-pâdam
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 7 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

bahûdaram bahu-damstrâ-karâlam
drstvâ lokâh pravyathitâs tathâham
WORD FOR WORD
rupam -- the form; mahat -- very great; te -- of You; bahu -- many; vaktra -- faces; netram -- and eyes;
maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; bahu -- many; bahu -- arms; uru -- thighs; padam -- and legs; bahuudaram -- many bellies; bahu-damstra -- many teeth; karalam -- horrible; drstva -- seeing; lokah -- all the
planets; pravyathitah -- perturbed; tatha -- similarly; aham -- I.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed at seeing Your great form, with its
many faces, eyes, arms, thighs, legs, and bellies and Your many terrible teeth; and as they are disturbed,
so am I.
Text 24
Seeing this way You touching the sky glowing with many colors, open mouths and wide open shining eyes, I
am unsettled within and unable to keep my composure and peace of mind, O Vishnu.
SANSKRIT

nabhah-sprsam dîptam aneka-varnam
vyâttânanam dîpta-visâla-netram
drstvâ hi tvâm pravyathitântarâtmâ
dhrtim na vindâmi samam ca visno
WORD FOR WORD
nabhah-sprsam -- touching the sky; diptam -- glowing; aneka -- many; varnam -- colors; vyatta -- open;
ananam -- mouths; dipta -- glowing; visala -- very great; netram -- eyes; drstva -- seeing; hi -- certainly;
tvam -- You; pravyathita -- perturbed; antah -- within; atma -- soul; dhrtim -- steadiness; na -- not;
vindami -- I have; samam -- mental tranquillity; ca -- also; visno -- O Lord Vishnu.
TRANSLATION
O all-pervading Vishnu, seeing You with Your many radiant colors touching the sky, Your gaping mouths,
and Your great glowing eyes, my mind is perturbed by fear. I can no longer maintain my steadiness or
equilibrium of mind.
Text 25
Seeing thus Your terrifying teeth and faces like the fire of the end of time, I lose my sense of direction
and find myself nailed to the ground; O Lord of Lords, refuge of the worlds, have mercy!
SANSKRIT

damshthrâ-karâlâni ca te mukhâni
drishthvaiva kâlânala-sannibhâni
dis'o na jâne na labhe ca s'arma
prasîda deves'a jagan-nivâsa

WORD FOR WORD
damshthrâ -- teeth; karâlâni -- terrible; ca -- also; te -- Your; mukhâ-ni -- faces; drishthvâ -- seeing; eva -thus; kâla-anala -- the fire of death; sannibhâni -- as if; disah -- the directions; na -- not; jâne -- I know;
na -- not; labhe -- I obtain; ca -- and; s'arma -- grace; prasîda -- be pleased; deva-îs'a -- O Lord of all lords;
jagat-nivâsa -- O refuge of the worlds.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I cannot keep my balance seeing thus
Your blazing deathlike faces and awful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered.
Text 26-27
In this of You I also see Dhritarâshthra with all his sons and the scores of warrior kings and Bhîshmadeva,
Dronâcârya and Karna together with also our chief warriors rushing into Your mouth where some of them I
see with crushed skulls caught between the frightening, dreadful teeth.
SANSKRIT

amî ca tvâm dhrtarâstrasya putrâh
sarve sahaivâvanipâla-sanghaih
bhîsmo dronah sûta-putras tathâsau
sahâsmadîyair api yodha-mukhyaih
vaktrâni te tvaramânâ visanti
damstrâ-karâlâni bhayânakâni
kecid vilagnâ dasanântaresu
sandrsyante cûrnitair uttamângaih

Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 8 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
ami -- these; ca -- also; tvam -- You; dhrtarastrasya -- of Dhrtarastra; putrah -- the sons; sarve -- all; saha
-- with; eva -- indeed; avani-pala -- of warrior kings; sanghaih -- the groups; bhismah -- Bhîshmadeva;
dronah -- Dronacarya; suta-putrah -- Karna; tatha -- also; asau -- that; saha -- with; asmadiyaih -- our; api
-- also; yodha-mukhyaih -- chiefs among the warriors;
vaktrani -- mouths; te -- Your; tvaramanah -- rushing; visanti -- are entering; damstra -- teeth; karalani -terrible; bhayanakani -- very fearful; kecit -- some of them; vilagnah -- becoming attached; dasanaantaresu -- between the teeth; sandrsyante -- are seen; curnitaih -- with smashed; uttama-angaih -heads.
TRANSLATION
All the sons of Dhrtarastra, along with their allied kings, and Bhîshma, Drona, Karna -- and our chief
soldiers also -- are rushing into Your fearful mouths. And some I see trapped with heads smashed between
Your teeth.
Text 28
As the multitude of streams that inevitably glide towards the waves of the sea, similarly all these human
heroes of this world enter into the mouths fiery.
SANSKRIT

yathâ nadînâm bahâvo 'mbu-vegâh
samudram evâbhimnukhâ dravanti
tathâ tavâmî nara-loka-vîrâ
visanti vaktrâny abhivijvalanti
WORD FOR WORD
yatha -- as; nadinam -- of the rivers; bahavah -- the many; ambu-vegah -- waves of the waters; samudram
-- the ocean; eva -- certainly; abhimukhah -- towards; dravanti -- glide; tatha -- similarly; tava -- Your;
ami -- all these; nara-loka-virah -- kings of human society; visanti -- are entering; vaktrani -- the mouths;
abhivijvalanti -- and are blazing.
TRANSLATION
As the many waves of the rivers flow into the ocean, so do all these great warriors enter blazing into Your
mouths.
Text 29
As moths heading full speed for destruction into a blazing fire, the same way all people also full speed
enter your mouths to find destruction.
SANSKRIT

yathâ pradîptam jvalanam patangâ
visanti nâsâya samrddha-vegâh
tathaiva nâsâya visanti lokâs
tavâpi vaktrâni samrddha-vegâh

WORD FOR WORD
yatha -- as; pradiptam -- blazing; jyalanam -- a fire; patangah --,moths; visanti -- enter; nasaya -- for
destruction; samrddha -- with full; vegah -- speed; tatha eva -- similarly; nasaya -- for destruction; visanti
-- are entering; lokah -- all people; tava -- Your; api -- also; vaktrani -- mouths; samrddha-vegah -- with
full speed.
TRANSLATION
I see all people rushing full speed into Your mouths, as moths dash to destruction in a blazing fire.
Text 30
Licking, You devour the people from all directions with Your flaming mouths covering the universe with all
the terribly scorching rays of Your effulgence, o Vishnu.
SANSKRIT

lelihyase grasamânah samantâl
lokân samagrân vadanair jvaladbhih
tejobhir âpûryajagat samagram
bhâsas tavogrâh pratapanti visno
WORD FOR WORD
lelihyase -- You are licking; grasamanah -- devouring; samantat -- from all directions; lokan -- people;
samagran -- all; vadanaih -- by the mouths; jyaladbhih -- blazing; tejobhih -- by effulgence; apurya -covering; jagat -- the universe; samagram -- all; bhasah -- rays; tava -- Your; ugrah -- terrible; pratapanti - are scorching; visno -- O all-pervading Lord.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 9 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
O Vishnu, I see You devouring all people from all sides with Your flaming mouths. Covering all the universe
with Your effulgence, You are manifest with terrible, scorching rays.
Text 31
Please explain me who You, in this fearsome form, are. I offer You, o great God, my obeisances, be so
good to me; I wish to know the original of You as I surely do not to comprehend Your mission.
SANSKRIT

âkhyâhi me ko bhavân ugra-rûpo
namo 'stu te deva-vara prasîda
vijnâtum icchâmi bhavantam âdyam
na hi prajânâmi tava pravrttim

WORD FOR WORD
akhyahi -- please explain; me -- unto me; kah -- who; bhavan -- You; ugra-rupah -- fierce form; namah
astu -- obeisances; te -- unto You; deva-vara -- O great one amongst the demigods; prasida -- be gracious;
vijnatum -- to know; icchami -- I wish; bhavantam -- You; adyam -- the original; na -- not; hi -- certainly;
prajanami -- do I know; tava --Your; pravrttim -- mission.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer my obeisances unto You; please be
gracious to me. You are the primal Lord. I want to know about You, for I do not know what Your mission
is.
Text 32
The Supreme Lord said: "Time I am, the great destroyer of the worlds engaged here in destroying all
people, except for you [brothers] only, will all the soldiers who are situated on both sides, find their end.
SANSKRIT

srî-bhagavân uvâca
kâlo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddho
lokân samâhartum iha pravrttah
rte 'pi tvâm na bhavisyanti sarve
ye 'vasthitâh pratyanîkesu yodhâh
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Personality of Godhead said; kalah -- time; asmi -- I am; loka -- of the worlds;
ksaya-krt -- the destroyer; pravrddhah -- great; lokan -- all people; samahartum -- in destroying; iha -- in
this world; pravrttah -- engaged; rte -- without, except for; api -- even; tvam -- you; na -- never;
bhavisyanti -- will be; sarve -- all; ye -- who; avasthitah -- situated; prati-anikesu -- on the opposite sides;
yodhah -- the soldiers.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Time I am, the great destroyer of the worlds, and I have come
here to destroy all people. With the exception of you [the Pandavas], all the soldiers here on both sides
will be slain.
Text 33
Therefore You must get up and gain fame conquering the enemies and enjoy the kingdom flourishing by
Me; for sure all these were destined to be killed, be merely the instrument of that, o left-handed one.
SANSKRIT

tasmât tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
jitvâ satrûn bhunksva râjyam samrddham
mayaivaite nihatâh pûrvam eva
nimitta-mâtram bhava savyasâcin

WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; tvam -- you; uttistha -- get up; yasah -- fame; labhasva -- gain; jitva -- conquering;
satrun -- enemies; bhunksva -- enjoy; rajyam -- kingdom; samrddham -- flourishing; maya -- by Me; eva -certainly; ete -- all these; nihatah -- killed; purvam eva -- by previous arrangement; nimitta-matram- just
the cause; bhava -- become; savya-sacin -- O Savyasaci.
TRANSLATION
Therefore get up. Prepare to fight and win glory. Conquer your enemies and enjoy a flourishing kingdom.
They are already put to death by My arrangement, and you, O Savyasaci, can be but an instrument in the
fight.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 10 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 34
Drona, Bhîshma and Jayadratha, Karna and others - these great warriors surely have been killed by Me
already, destroy and do not worry; just fight and so doing you will conquer your enemies."
SANSKRIT

dronam ca bhîsmam cajayadratham ca
karnam tathânyân api yodha-vîrân
mayâ hatâms tvam jahi mâ vyathisthâ
yudhyasva jetâsi rane sapatnân

WORD FOR WORD
dronam ca -- also Drona; bhismam ca -- also Bhîshma; jayadratham ca -- also Jayadratha; karnam -- Karna;
tatha -- also; anyan -- others; api -- certainly; yodha-viran -- great warriors; maya -- by Me; hatan -already killed; tvam -- you; jahi -- destroy; ma -- do not; vyathisthah -- be disturbed; yudhyasva -- just
fight; jeta asi -- you will conquer; rane -- in the fight; sapatnan -- enemies.
TRANSLATION
Drona, Bhîshma, Jayadratha, Karna and the other great warriors have already been destroyed by Me.
Therefore, kill them and do not be disturbed. Simply fight, and you will vanquish your enemies in battle.
Text 35
Sañjaya said:"Thus hearing the speech of Kes'ava, with folded hands and trembling, the crowned one
[Arjuna] offered prayers again and spoke to Krishna with a faltering voice bowing before Him.
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
etac chrutvâ vacanam kesavasya
krtânjalir vepamânah kirîtî
namaskrtvâ bhûya evâha krsnam
sa-gadgadam bhîta-bhîtah pranamya
WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; etat -- thus; srutva -- hearing; vacanam -- the speech; kesavasya -- of
Krishna; krta-anjalih -- with folded hands; vepamanah -- trembling; kiriti -- Arjuna; namas-krtva -- offering
obeisances; bhuyah -- again; eva -- also; aha -- said; krsnam -- unto Krishna; sa-gadgadam -- with a
faltering voice; bhita-bhitah -- fearful; pranamya -- offering obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said to Dhrtarastra: O King, after hearing these words from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the trembling Arjuna offered obeisances with folded hands again and again. He fearfully spoke to Lord
Krishna in a faltering voice, as follows.
Text 36
Arjuna said: ' Rightly, o master of the senses, by Your glories the entire world rejoices and gets attached:
the demoniac out of fear flee in all directions, while the chores of the perfected offer their respects.
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
sthâne hrsîkesa tava prakîrtyâ
jagat prahrsyaty anurajyate ca
raksâmsi bhîtâni diso dravanti
sarve namasyanti ca siddha-sanghâh

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; sthane -- rightly; hrsika-isa -- O master of all senses; tava -- Your; prakirtya - by the glories; jagat -- the entire world; prahrsyati -- is rejoicing; anurajyate -- is becoming attached; ca
-- and; raksamsi -- the demons; bhitani -- out of fear; disah -- in all directions; dravanti -- are fleeing;
sarve -- all; namasyanti -- are offering respects; ca -- also; siddha-sanghah -- the perfect human beings.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O master of the senses, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus everyone
becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer You their respectful homage, the demons
are afraid, and they flee here and there. All this is rightly done.
Text 37
And why should they not respect You, o great Soul better than Brahmâ, isn't it because as the Original
Creator, o unilimited God of gods and refuge of the universe, You are imperishable and transcendental to
cause and effect ?
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 11 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

kasmâc ca te na nameran mahâtman
garîyase brahmano 'py âdi-kartre
ananta devesa jagan-nivâsa
tvam aksaram sad-asat tat param yat

WORD FOR WORD
kasmat -- why; ca -- also; te -- unto You; na -- not; nameran -- they should offer proper obeisances; mahaatman -- O great one; gariyase -- who are better; brahmanah -- than Brahma; api -- although; adi-kartre -to the supreme creator; ananta -- O unlimited; deva-isa -- O God of the gods; jagat-nivasa -- O refuge of
the universe; tvam -- You are; aksaram -- imperishable; sat-asat -- to cause and effect; tat param -transcendental; yat -- because.
TRANSLATION
O great one, greater even than Brahma, You are the original creator. Why then should they not offer their
respectful obeisances unto You? O limitless one, God of gods, refuge of the universe! You are the
invincible source, the cause of all causes, transcendental to this material manifestation.
Text 38
You are the original God and person, the oldest of this universe, the transcendental refuge and the
knower; You are the knowable, the beyond and the abode, by You the universe is pevaded o infinite form!
SANSKRIT

tvam âdi-devah purusah purânas
tvam asya visvasya param nidhânam
vettâsi vedyam ca param ca dhâma
tvayâ tatam visvam ananta-rûpa

WORD FOR WORD
tvam -- You; adi-devah -- the original Supreme God; purusah -- personality; puranah -- old; tvam -- You;
asya -- of this; visvasya -- universe; param -- transcendental; nidhanam -- refuge; vetta -- the knower; asi
-- You are; vedyam -- the knowable; ca -- and; param -- transcendental; ca -- and; dhama -- refuge; tvaya
-- by You; tatam -- pervaded; visvam -- the universe; ananta-rupa -- O unlimited form.
TRANSLATION
You are the original Personality of Godhead, the oldest, the ultimate sanctuary of this manifested cosmic
world. You are the knower of everything, and You are all that is knowable. You are the supreme refuge,
above the material modes. O limitless form! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded by You!
Text 39
You are the controller of the air, the fire, the water and the moon, You are the Brahmâ and the great
grandfather, again and again I offer you my respects; a thousand times over and over I offer You My
obeisances.
SANSKRIT

vâyur yamo 'gnir varunah sasânkah
prajâpatis tvam prapitâmahas ca
namo namas te 'stu sahasra-krtvah
punas ca bhûyo 'pi namo namas te
WORD FOR WORD
vayuh -- air; yamah -- the controller; agnih -- fire; varunah -- water; sasa-ankah -- the moon; prajapatih -Brahma; tvam -- You; prapitamahah -- the great-grandfather; ca -- also; namah -- my respects; namah -again my respects; te -- unto You; astu -- let there be; sahasra-krtvah -- a thousand times; punah ca -- and
again; bhuyah -- again; api -- also; namah -- offering my respects; namah te -- offering my respects unto
You.
TRANSLATION
You are air, and You are the supreme controller! You are fire, You are water, and You are the moon! You
are Brahma, the first living creature, and You are the great-grandfather. I therefore offer my respectful
obeisances unto You a thousand times, and again and yet again!
Text 40
Heil to the front and to the back of You, unto You I offer my respects indeed from all sides because You
are everything, the infinite power and the boudless might; everything is covered by You and therefore You
are everything.
SANSKRIT

namah purastâd atha prsthatas te
namo 'stu te sarvata eva sarva

Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 12 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

ananta-vîryâmita-vikramas tvam
sarvam samâpnosi tato 'si sarvah
WORD FOR WORD
namah -- offering obeisances; purastat -- from the front; atha -- also; prsthatah -- from behind; te -- unto
You; namah astu -- I offer my respects; te -- unto You; sarvatah -- from all sides; eva -- indeed; sarva -because You are everything; ananta-virya -- unlimited potency; amita-vikramah -- and unlimited force;
tvam -- You; sarvam -- everything; samapnosi -- You cover; tatah -- therefore; asi -- You are; sarvah -everything.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances to You from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded power, You are the
master of limitless might! You are all-pervading, and thus You are everything!
Text 41-42
Presumtuously thinking as a friend I said: "O Krishna, o Yâdava [descendant from the Yadu-dynasty], o
dear friend" and so; nor of my foolishness nor of my love, did I know of these glories of You. For whatever
I also said joking dishonoring You, relaxing, lying down and sitting, while eating together and being alone
with You, o Infallible One, as also in the company of others, I ask forgiveness, o Immeasurable One.
SANSKRIT

sakheti matvâ prasabham yad uktam
he krsna he yâdava he sakheti
ajânatâ mahimânam tavedam
mayâ pramâdât pranayena vâpi
yac câvahâsârtham asat-krto 'si
vihâra-sayyâsana-bhojanesu
eko 'thavâpy acyuta tat-samaksam
tat ksâmaye tvâm aham aprameyam
WORD FOR WORD
sakha -- friend; iti -- thus; matva -- thinking; prasabham -- presumptuously; yat -- whatever; uktam -said; he krsna -- O Krishna; he yadava -- O Yadava; he sakhe -- O my dear friend; iti -- thus; ajanata -without knowing; mahimanam -- glories; tava -- Your; idam -- this; maya -- by me; pramadat -- out of
foolishness; pranayena -- out of love; va api -- either;
yat -- whatever; ca -- also; avahasa-artham -- for joking; asat-krtah -- dishonored; asi -- You have been;
vihara -- in relaxation; sayya -- in lying down; asana -- in sitting; bhojanesu -- or while eating together;
ekah -- alone; atha va -- or; api -- also; acyuta -- O infallible one; tat-samaksam -- among companions; tat
-- all those; ksamaye -- ask forgiveness; tvam -- from You; aham -- I; aprameyam -- immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
Thinking of You as my friend, I have rashly addressed You "O Krishna," "O Yadava," "O my friend," not
knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I may have done in madness or in love. I have dishonored
You many times, jesting as we relaxed, lay on the same bed, or sat or ate together, sometimes alone and
sometimes in front of many friends. O infallible one, please excuse me for all those offenses.
Text 43
The father You are of all the worlds moving and nonmoving, of all this You are the venerable one and the
teacher, never is there anyone equally glorious to You; how can others be greater than You in the three
worlds, o Incomparable Power?
SANSKRIT

pitâsi lokasya carâcarasya
tvam asya pûjyas ca gurur garîyân
na tvat-samo 'sty abhyadhikah kuto 'nyo
loka-traye 'py apratima-prabhâva
WORD FOR WORD
pita -- the father; asi -- You are; lokasya -- of all the world; cara -- moving; acarasya -- and nonmoving;
tvam -- You are; asya -- of this; pujyah -- worshipable; ca -- also; guruh -- master; gariyan -- glorious; na -never; tvat-samah -- equal to You; asti -- there is; abhyadhikah -- greater; kutah -- how is it possible;
anyah -- other; loka-traye -- in the three planetary systems; api -- also; apratima-prabhava -- O
immeasurable power.
TRANSLATION
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, of the moving and the nonmoving. You are its
worshipable chief, the supreme spiritual master. No one is equal to You, nor can anyone be one with You.
How then could there be anyone greater than You within the three worlds, O Lord of immeasurable power?
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 13 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 44
Therefore prostating my body, I pay You who I know as the venerable Supreme One my respect to beg
Your mercy and tolerate me like a father should with his son, like a friend should with a friend and a lover
should with his dearmost, My Lord.
SANSKRIT

tasmât pranamya pranidhâya kâyam
prasâdaye tvâm aham îsam îdyam
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuh
priyah priyâyârhasi deva sodhum
WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; pranamya -- offering obeisances; pranidhaya -- laying down; kayam -- the body;
prasadaye -- to beg mercy; tvam -- unto You; aham -- I; isam -- unto the Supreme Lord; idyam -worshipable; pita iva -- like a father; putrasya -- with a son; sakha iva -- like a friend; sakhyuh -- with a
friend; priyah -- a lover; priya-yah -- with the dearmost; arhasi -- You should; deva -- my Lord; sodhum -tolerate.
TRANSLATION
You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I fall down to offer You my
respectful obeisances and ask Your mercy. As a father tolerates the impudence of his son, or a friend
tolerates the impertinence of a friend, or a wife tolerates the familiarity of her partner, please tolerate
the wrongs I may have done You.
Text 45
I am glad to have seen what was never seen before, but my mind is also unsettled; be so gracious to show
me Your form [again] o God, Lord of Lords and refuge of the Universe.
SANSKRIT

adrsta-pûrvam hrsito 'smi drstvâ
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano me
tad eva me darsaya deva rûpam
prasîda devesa jagan-nivâsa
WORD FOR WORD
adrsta-purvam -- never seen before; hrsitah -- gladdened; asmi -- I am; drstva -- by seeing; bhayena -- out
of fear; ca -- also; pravyathitam -- perturbed; manah -- mind; me -- my; tat -- that; eva -- certainly; me -unto me; darsaya -- show; deva -- O Lord; rupam -- the form; prasida- just be gracious; deva-isa -- O Lord
of lords; jagat-nivasa -- O refuge of the universe.
TRANSLATION
After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am gladdened, but at the same time my
mind is disturbed with fear. Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form as
the Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of the universe.
Text 46
I wish to see You in the position with helmet, club and disc in Your hand, just take the fourhanded form
[also holding the conch and lotus], o thousandhanded One, o Universal Form.
SANSKRIT

kirîtinam gadinam cakra-hastam
icchâmi tvâm drastum aham tathaiva
tenaiva rûpena catur-bhujena
sahasra-bâho bhava visva-mûrte

WORD FOR WORD
kiritinam -- with helmet; gadinam -- with club; cakra-hastam -- disc in hand; icchami -- I wish; tvam -You; drastum -- to see; aham -- I; tatha eva -- in that position; tena eva -- in that; rupena -- form; catuhbhujena -- four-handed; sahasra-baho -- O thousand-handed one; bhava -- just become; visva-murte -- O
universal form.
TRANSLATION
O universal form, O thousand-armed Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with helmeted head
and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Your hands. I long to see You in that form.
Text 47
The Supreme Lord said: 'From My grace for You Arjuna, this transcendental form of the oneness of my self
was shown; besides you no one saw this unlimited original form of Me, of the full effulgence of the entire
universe, before.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 14 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
mayâ prasannena tavârjunedam
rûpam param darsitam âtma-yogât
tejomayam visvam anantam âdyam
yan me tvad anyena na drsta-pûrvam
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; maya -- by Me; prasannena -- happily;
tava -- unto you; arjuna -- O Arjuna; idam -- this; rupam -- form; param -- transcendental; darsitam -shown; atma-yogat -- by My internal potency; tejah-mayam -- full of effulgence; visvam -- the entire
universe; anantam -- unlimited; adyam -- original; yat -- that which; me -- My; tvat anyena -- besides you;
na drsta-purvam -- no one has previously seen.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, happily have I shown you, by My internal
potency, this supreme universal form within the material world. No one before you has ever seen this
primal form, unlimited and full of glaring effulgence.
Text 48
O best of the Kuru-warriors, in this material world in this form no other than you could see this nor by
vedic sacrifice or study nor by charity and pious deeds or severe penances.
SANSKRIT

na veda-yajnâdhyayanair na dânair
na ca kriyâbhir na tapobhir ugraih
evam rûpah sakya aham nrloke
drastum tvad anyena kuru-pravîra

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; veda-yajna -- by sacrifice; adhyayanaih -- or Vedic study; na -- never; danaih -- by charity; na
-- never; ca -- also; kriyabhih -- by pious activities; na -- never; tapobhih -- by serious penances; ugraih -severe; evam-rupah -- in this form; sakyah -- can; aham -- I; nr-loke -- in this material world; drastum -be seen; tvat -- than you; anyena -- by another; kuru-pravira -- O best among the Kuru warriors.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this universal form of Mine, for neither by
studying the Vedas, nor by performing sacrifices, nor by charity, nor by pious activities, nor by severe
penances can I be seen in this form in the material world.
Text 49
Don't be troubled, don't be bewildered seeing this horrible form, just see My form without fear and thus
with a happy mind again as It is'."
SANSKRIT

mâ te vyathâ mâ ca vimûdha-bhâvo
drstvâ rûpam ghoram îdrn mamedam
vyapetabhîh prîta-manâh punas tvam
tad eva me rûpam idam prapasya
WORD FOR WORD
ma -- let it not be; te -- unto you; vyatha -- trouble; ma -- let it not be; ca -- also; vimudha-bhavah -bewilderment; drstva -- by seeing; rupam -- form; ghoram -- horrible; idrk -- as it is; mama -- My; idam -this; vyapeta-bhih -- free from all fear; prita-manah -- pleased in mind; punah -- again; tvam -- you; tat -that; eva -- thus; me -- My; rupam -- form; idam -- this; prapasya -- just see.
TRANSLATION
You have been perturbed and bewildered by seeing this horrible feature of Mine. Now let it be finished.
My devotee, be free again from all disturbances. With a peaceful mind you can now see the form you
desire.
Text 50
Sañjaya said: "Vâsudeva speaking that way of His own form showed Himself once more [as four armed] and
became the great soul of His own beautiful [two armed] form again reassuring thus the fearful Arjuna.
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
ity arjunam vâsudevas tathoktvâ
svakam rûpam darsayâmâsa bhûyah
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 15 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

âsvâsayâmâsa ca bhîtam enam
bhûtvâ punah saumya-vapur mahâtmâ
WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; iti -- thus; arjunam -- unto Arjuna; vasudevah -- Krishna; tatha -- in that
way; uktva -- speaking; svakam -- His own; rupam -- form; darsayam asa -- showed; bhuyah -- again;
asvasayam asa -- encouraged; ca -- also; bhitam -- fearful; enam -- him; bh utva -- becoming; punah -again; saumya-vapuh -- the beautiful form; maha-atma -- the great one.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said to Dhrtarastra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, having spoken thus to Arjuna,
displayed His real four-armed form and at last showed His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful
Arjuna.
Text 51
Arjuna said: 'Seeing this very beautiful human form of You, o chastiser of the enemies, I am now composed
in mind and myself again.'
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
drstvedam mânusam rûpam
tava saumyam janârdana
idânîm asmi samvrttah
sa-cetâh prakritim gatah

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; drstva -- seeing; idam -- this; manusam -- human; rupam -- form; tava -Your; saumyam -- very beautiful; janardana -- O chastiser of the enemies; idanim -- now; asmi -- I am;
samvrttah -- settled; sa-cetah -- in my consciousness; prakritim -- to my own nature; gatah -- returned.
TRANSLATION
When Arjuna thus saw Krishna in His original form, he said: O Janardana, seeing this humanlike form, so
very beautiful, I am now composed in mind, and I am restored to my original nature.
Text 52
The Supreme Lord said: 'This form of mine as you have seen it is very difficult to see, even the demigods
eternally aspire to see this form.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
sudurdarsam idam rûpam
drstavân asi yan mama
devâ apy asya rûpasya
nityam darshana-kânksinah
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; su-durdarsam -- very difficult to see; idam
-- this; rupam -- form; drstavan asi -- as you have seen; yat -- which; mama -- of Mine; devah -- the
demigods; api -- also; asya -- this; rupasya -- form; nityam -- eternally; darshana-kanksinah -- aspiring to
see.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, this form of Mine you are now seeing is very
difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever seeking the opportunity to see this form, which is so dear.
Text 53
Never can I [as said] be seen by studying the Vedas, penances, by charity or worship, the way you saw Me.
SANSKRIT

nâham vedair na tapasâ
na dânena na cejyayâ
sakya evam-vidho drastum
drstavân asi mâm yathâ

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; aham -- I; vedaih -- by study of the Vedas; na -- never; tapasa -- by serious penances; na -never; danena -- by charity; na -- never; ca -- also; ijyaya -- by worship; sakyah -- it is possible; evamvidhah -- like this; drastum -- to see; drstavan -- seeing; asi -- you are; mam -- Me; yatha -- as.
Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 16 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
The form you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be understood simply by studying the
Vedas, nor by undergoing seriouspenances, nor by charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means that
one can see Me as I am.
Text 54
Only trough devotional service free from ulterior motives it is possible to know and see Me like this
Arjuna, and factually get access, o mighty armed one.
SANSKRIT

bhaktyâ tv ananyayâ sakya
aham evam-vidho 'rjuna
jnâtum drastum ca tattvena
pravestum ca parantapa

WORD FOR WORD
bhaktya -- by devotional service; tu -- but; ananyaya -- without being mixed with fruitive activities or
speculative knowledge; sakyah -- possible; aham -- I; evam-vidhah -- like this; arjuna -- O Arjuna; jnatum - to know; drastum -- to see; ca -- and; tattvena -- in fact; pravestum -- to enter into; ca -- also;
parantapa -- O mighty-armed one.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as I am, standing before you,
and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.
Text 55
The one who is engaged in working for Me, with Me as the Supreme, in my devotional service free from
materialistic association and enmity among the living beings, reaches Me, o son of Pându.
SANSKRIT

mat-karma-krn mat-paramo
mad-bhaktah sanga-varjitah
nirvairah sarva-bhûtesu
yah sa mâm eti pândava

WORD FOR WORD
mat-karma-krt -- engaged in doing My work; mat-paramah -- considering Me the Supreme; mat-bhaktah -engaged in My devotional service; sanga-varjitah -- freed from the contamination of fruitive activities and
mental speculation; nirvairah -- without an enemy; sarva-bhutesu -- among all living entities; yah -- one
who; sah -- he; mam -- unto Me; eti -- comes; pandava -- O son of Pandu.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, he who engages in My pure devotional service, free from the contaminations of fruitive
activities and mental speculation, he who works for Me, who makes Me the supreme goal of his life, and
who is friendly to every living being -- he certainly comes to Me.

Chapter11 - The Yoga of the Universal Form

…Page 17 of 17

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 12

The Yoga of Devotion

On fixing oneself on the ultimate of perfection
Text 1
Arjuna said: 'Thus, of those who as Your devotees are always engaged in proper worship and of those who
go beyond the senses for the unmanifested - who of them are the best in the knowledge of yoga?
SANSKRIT:

arjuna uvâca
evam satatâ-yukta ye
bhaktâs tvâm paryupâsate
ye câpy aksaram avyaktâm
tesâm ke yoga-vittamâh
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; evam -- thus; satata -- always; yuktah -- engaged; ye -- those who; bhaktah - devotees; tvam -- You; paryupasate -- properly worship; ye -- those who; ca -- also; api -- again; aksaram
-- beyond the senses; avyaktam -- the unmanifested; tesam -- of them; ke -- who; yoga-vit-tamah -- the
most perfect in knowledge of yoga.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna inquired: Which are considered to be more perfect, those who are always properly engaged in Your
devotional service or those who worship the impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?
Text 2
The Supreme Lord said: 'Those who fix their mind on Me and who always are engaged in worship, endowed
by Me with faith in the transcendental, are considered to be of the strongest bond.
SANSKRIT:

srî bhagavân uvâca
mayy âvesya mano ye mâm
nitya-yuktâ upâsate
sraddhayâ parayopetâs
te me yuktatamâ matâh
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi -- upon Me; avesya -- fixing; manah - the mind; ye -- those who; mam -- Me; nitya -- always; yuktah -- engaged; upasate -- worship; sraddhaya
-- with faith; paraya -- transcendental; upetah -- endowed; te -- they; me -- by Me; yukta-tamah -- most
perfect in yoga; matah -- are considered.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Those who fix their minds on My personal form and are always
engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith are considered by Me to be most perfect.
Chapter12 - The Yoga of Devotion

…Page 1 of 6

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3-4
But those who, of the indefinite and unmanifest that is beyond the senses, are completely of worship and
fixed on the all-pervading, inconceivable,unchanging and immovable, controlling all the senses and
equipoised towards all whenever; they for certain engaged for the welfare of all attain Me.
SANSKRIT:

ye tv aksaram anirdesyam
avyaktam paryupâsate
sarvatra-gam acintyam ca
kûta-stham acalam dhruvam
sanniyamyendriya-grâmam
sarvatra sama-buddhayah
te prâpnuvanti mâm eva
sarva-bhûta-hite ratâh
WORD FOR WORD
ye -- those who; tu -- but; aksaram -- that which is
beyond the perception of the senses; anirdesyam -indefinite; avyaktam -- unmanifested; paryupasate -completely engage in worshiping; sarvatra-gam -- allpervading; acintyam -- inconceivable; ca -- also; kutastham -- unchanging; acalam -- immovable; dhruvam -fixed;
sanniyamya -- controlling; indriya-gramam -- all the
senses; sarvatra -- everywhere; sama-buddhayah -equally disposed; te -- they; prapnuvanti -- achieve;
mam -- Me; eva -- certainly; sarva-bhuta-hite -- for the
welfare of all living entities; ratah -- engaged.
TRANSLATION
But those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond the perception of the senses, the
all-pervading, inconceivable, unchanging, fixed and immovable -- the impersonal conception of the
Absolute Truth -- by controlling the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone, such persons,
engaged in the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.
Text 5
The trouble for those who are attached to the unmanifested is very great; for those minds set to the
unseen surely is the progress of the embodied achieved with difficulty.
SANSKRIT:

kleso 'dhikataras tesâm
avyaktâsakta-cetasâm
avyaktâ hi gatir duhkham
dehavadbhir avâpyate

WORD FOR WORD
klesah -- trouble; adhika-tarah -- very much; tesam -- of them; avyakta -- to the unmanifested; asakta -attached; cetasam -- of those whose minds; avyakta -- toward the unmanifested; hi -- certainly; gatih -progress; duhkham -- with trouble; deha-vadbhih -- by the embodied; avapyate -- is achieved.
TRANSLATION
For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme,
advancement is very troublesome. To make progress in that discipline is always difficult for those who are
embodied.
Text 6-7
But to those whose activities are all directed to Me and who give up in the attachment to Me, undivided
and sure by the practice of yoga of meditating and worshipping Me; of those whose minds are fixed on Me I
become the swift deliverer of death in material existence, o son of Prithâ.
SANSKRIT:

ye tu sarvâni karmâni
mayi sannyâsya mat-parâh
Chapter12 - The Yoga of Devotion

…Page 2 of 6

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

ananyenaiva yogena
mâm dhyâyanta upâsate
tesâm aham samuddhartâ
mrtyu-samsâra-sâgarât
bhavâmi na cirât pârtha
mayy âvesita-cetasâm

WORD FOR WORD
ye -- those who; tu -- but; sarvani -- all; karmani -- activities; mayi -- unto Me; sannyâsya -- giving up;
mat-parah -- being attached to Me; ananyena -- without division; eva -- certainly; yogena -- by practice of
such bhakti-yoga; mam -- upon Me; dhyayantah -- meditating; upasate -- worship;
tesam -- of them; aham -- I; samuddharta -- the deliverer; mrtyu -- of death; samsara -- in material
existence; sagarat -- from the ocean; bhavami -- I become; na -- not; cirat -- after a long time; Prithâ-- O
son of Prithâ; mayi -- upon Me; avesita -- fixed; cetasam -- of those whose minds.
TRANSLATION
But those who worship Me, giving up all their activities unto Me and being devoted to Me without
deviation, engaged in devotional service and always meditating upon Me, having fixed their minds upon
Me, O son of Prithâ-- for them I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and death.
Text 8
Be sure to fix your mind on Me and to apply your intelligence for Me and you will live in Me for certain and
never suffer any doubt thereafter.
SANSKRIT:

mayy eva mana âdhatsva
mayi buddhim nivesaya
nivasisyasi mayy eva
ata ûrdhvam na samsayah
WORD FOR WORD
mayi -- upon Me; eva -- certainly; manah -- mind; adhatsva -- fix; mayi -- upon Me; buddhim -intelligence; nivesaya -- apply; nivasisyasi -- you will live; mayi -- in Me; eva -- certainly; atah urdhvam -thereafter; na -- never; samsayah -- doubt.
TRANSLATION
Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and engage all your intelligence in Me.
Thus you will live in Me always, without a doubt.
Text 9
If you are not able to fix your mind on Me, then be steadfast holding on to the rules of yoga and develop a
desire to get to Me, o conqueror of wealth.
SANSKRIT:

atha cittam samâdhâtum
na saknosi mayi sthiram
abhyâsa-yogena tato
mâm icchâptum dhananjaya

WORD FOR WORD
atha -- if, therefore; cittam -- mind; samadhatum -- to fix; na -- not; saknosi -- you are able; mayi -- upon
Me; sthiram -- steadily; abhyasa-yogena -- by the practice of devotional service; tatah -- then; mam -- Me;
iccha -- desire; aptum -- to get; dhanam-jaya -- O winner of wealth, Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me without deviation, then follow
the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga. In this way develop a desire to attain Me.
Text 10
If You are even unable to practice that, then become dedicated in working for My sake as even by doing
work you will achieve perfection.
SANSKRIT:

abhyâse 'py asamartho 'si
mat-karma-paramo bhava
mad-artham api karmâni
kurvan siddhim avâpsyasi
Chapter12 - The Yoga of Devotion

…Page 3 of 6

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
abhyase -- in practice; api -- even if; asamarthah -- unable; asi -- you are; mat-karma -- My work; paramah
-- dedicated to; bhava -- become; mat-artham -- for My sake; api -- even; karmani -- work; kurvan -performing; siddhim -- perfection; avapsyasi -- you will achieve.
TRANSLATION
If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to work for Me, because by working for
Me you will come to the perfect stage.
Text 11
And if you are even unable to do this in the yoga unto Me, then take your refuge in the renunciation of the
results of all action and then remain with yourself.
SANSKRIT:

athaitad apy asakto 'si
kartum mad-yogam âsritah
sarva-karma-phala-tyâgam
tatah kuru yatâtmavân
WORD FOR WORD
atha -- even though; etat -- this; api -- also; asaktah -- unable; asi -- you are; kartum -- to perform; mat -unto Me; yogam -- in devotional service; asritah -- taking refuge; sarva-karma -- of all activities; phala -of the results; tyagam -- renunciation; tatah -- then; kuru -- do; yata-atma-van -- self-situated.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness of Me, then try to act giving up all results of your
work and try to be self-situated.
Text 12
Better than [mere] practice is knowledge and better than [mere] knowledge is meditation considered to
be. Renouncing the fruits of labor is better than [mere] meditation as of such renunciation peace will
ensue.
SANSKRIT:

sreyo hi jnânam abhyâsâj
jnânâd dhyânam visisyate
dhyânat karma-phala-tyâgas
tyâgâc chântir anantaram
WORD FOR WORD
sreyah -- better; hi -- certainly; jñânam -- knowledge; abhyasat -- than practice; jñânat -- than
knowledge; dhyanam -- meditation; visisyate -- is considered better; dhyanat -- than meditation; karmaphala-tyagah -- renunciation of the results of fruitive action; tyagat -- by such renunciation; santih -peace; anantaram -- thereafter.
TRANSLATION
If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the cultivation of knowledge. Better than
knowledge, however, is meditation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits of action, for
by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind.
Text 13-14
With no dislike towards anyone and surely friendly and kind, nonpossessive, and not identified, equal in
distress and happiness, forgiving, satisfied and always devoted, selfcontrolled and with determination in
mind and intelligence always fixed on Me - such a devotee of Mine is very dear to Me.
SANSKRIT:

advestâ sarva-bhûtânâm
maitrah karuna eva ca
nirmamo nirahankârah
sama-duhkha-sukhah ksamî

santustah satatam yogî
yatâtmâ drdha-niscayah
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
WORD FOR WORD
advesta -- nonenvious; sarva-bhutanam -- toward all living entities; maitrah -- friendly; karunah -- kindly;
eva -- certainly; ca -- also; nirmamah -- with no sense of proprietorship; nirahankarah -- without false ego;
sama -- equal; duhkha -- in distress; sukhah -- and happiness; ksam i -- forgiving; santustah -- satisfied;
Chapter12 - The Yoga of Devotion

…Page 4 of 6

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
satatam -- always; yogi -- one engaged in devotion; yata-atma -- self-controlled; drdha-niscayah -- with
determination; mayi -- upon Me; arpita -- engaged; manah -- mind; buddhih -- and intelligence; yah -- one
who; mat-bhaktah -- My devotee; sah -- he; me -- to Me; priyah -- dear.
TRANSLATION
One who is not envious but is a kind friend to all living entities, who does not think himself a proprietor
and is free from false ego, who is equal in both happiness and distress, who is tolerant, always satisfied,
self-controlled, and engaged in devotional service with determination, his mind and intelligence fixed on
Me -- such a devotee of Mine is very dear to Me.
Text 15
Anyone of whom the people are never disturbed and who is also not disturbed by the people; he who is
free from ups and downs, fears and anxieties is very dear to Me.
SANSKRIT:

yasmân nodvijate loko
lokân nodvijate ca yah
harsâmarsa-bhayodvegair
mukto yah sa ca me priyah
WORD FOR WORD
yasmat -- from whom; na -- never; udvijate -- are agitated; lokah -- people; lokat -- from people; na -never; udvijate -- is disturbed; ca -- also; yah -- anyone who; harsa -- from happiness; amarsa -- distress;
bhaya -- fear; udvegaih -- and anxiety; muktah -- freed; yah -- who; sah -- anyone; ca -- also; me -- to Me;
priyah -- very dear.
TRANSLATION
He for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by anyone, who is equipoised in
happiness and distress, fear and anxiety, is very dear to Me.
Text 16
Anyone prepared for alternatives [neutral], who is pure, capable, unworried, untroubled and does not
consider mundane endeavoring, such a devotee of Mine is very dear to Me.
SANSKRIT:

anapeksah sucir daksa
udâsîno gata-vyathah
sarvârambha-parityâgî
yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
WORD FOR WORD
anapeksah -- neutral; sucih -- pure; daksah -- expert; udasinah -- free from care; gata-vyathah -- freed
from all distress; sarva-arambha -- of all endeavors; parityagi -- renouncer; yah -- anyone who; matbhaktah -- My devotee; sah -- he; me -- to Me; priyah -- very dear.
TRANSLATION
My devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities, who is pure, expert, without cares,
free from all pains, and not striving for some result, is very dear to Me.
Text 17
One who never rejoices nor hates, never grieves nor craves and remains detached for better or for worse one who is such a devotee is dear to Me.
SANSKRIT:

yo na hrsyati na dvesti
na socati na kânksati
subhâsubha-parityâgî
bhaktimân yah sa me priyah

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- one who; na -- never; hrsyati -- takes pleasure; na -- never; dvesti -- grieves; na -- never; socati -laments; na -- never; kanksati -- desires; subha -- of the auspicious; asubha -- and the inauspicious;
parityagi -- renouncer; bhakti-man -- devotee; yah -- one who; sah -- he is; me -- to Me; priyah -- dear.
TRANSLATION
One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments nor desires, and who renounces both auspicious
and inauspicious things -- such a devotee is very dear to Me.
Chapter12 - The Yoga of Devotion

…Page 5 of 6

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 18-19
Equal to foe and friend, in honor and dishonor, in heat and cold and in happiness and distress and the
same in absence of company; not different in infamy and repute, quiet and satisfied with anything, free
from his home and fixed in his determination as a devotee a man is very dear to Me.
SANSKRIT:

samah satrau ca mitre ca
tathâ mânâpamânayoh
sîtosna-sukha-duhkhesu
samah sanga-vivarjitah
tulya-nindâ-stutir maunî
santusto yena kenacit
aniketah sthira-matir
bhaktimân me priyo narah
WORD FOR WORD
samah -- equal; satrau -- to an enemy; ca -- also; mitre -- to a friend; ca -- also; tatha -- so; mana -- in
honor; apamanayoh -- and dishonor; sita -- in cold; usna -- heat; sukha -- happiness; duhkhesu -- and
distress; samah -- equipoised; sanga-vivarjitah -- free from all association;
tulya -- equal; ninda -- in defamation; stutih -- and repute; mauni -- silent; santustah -- satisfied; yena
kenacit -- with anything; aniketah -- having no residence; sthira -- fixed; matih -- determination; bhaktiman -- engaged in devotion; me -- to Me; priyah -- dear; narah -- a man.
TRANSLATION
One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and dishonor, heat and cold,
happiness and distress, fame and infamy, who is always free from contaminating association, always silent
and satisfied with anything, who doesn't care for any residence, who is fixed in knowledge and who is
engaged in devotional service -- such a person is very dear to Me.
Text 20
Those who but cherish the nectar of this nature and as said fully engage themselves with faith in the
sublime of Me - those devotees are most dear to Me.
SANSKRIT:

ye tu dharmyâmrtam idam
yathoktam paryupâsate
sraddadhânâ mat-paramâ
bhaktâs te 'tîva me priyâh
WORD FOR WORD
ye -- those who; tu -- but; dharma -- of religion; amrtam -- nectar; idam -- this; yatha -- as; uktam -- said;
paryupasate -- completely engage; sraddadhanah -- with faith; mat-paramah -- taking Me, the Supreme
Lord, as everything; bhaktah -- devotees; te -- they; ativa -- very, very; me -- to Me; priyah -- dear.
TRANSLATION
Those who follow this imperishable path of devotional service and who completely engage themselves
with faith, making Me the supreme goal, are very, very dear to Me.

Chapter12 - The Yoga of Devotion

…Page 6 of 6

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 13

The Yoga of Discrimination

On the difference between the knower and the known
Text 1-2
Arjuna said: 'Of nature and the original person and indeed also of the field of action and its knower I for
sure wish to know all the knowledge and that what is known, o Kes'ava'. The Supreme Lord said: 'This
body, o son of Kuntî, is so called the field of action and he who knows this is by those who know thus
called the knower of the field.
SANSKRIT:

arjuna uvâca
prakritim purusam caiva
ksetram ksetra-jnam eva ca
etad veditum icchâmi
jnânam jneyam ca kesava
srî-bhagavân uvâca
idam sarîram kaunteya
ksetram ity abhidhîyate
etad yo vetti tam prâhuh
ksetra-jna iti tad-vidah
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; Prakrtim -- nature; Purusam -- the enjoyer; ca -- also; eva -- certainly;
ksetram -- the field; ksetra-jnam -- the knower of the field; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; etat -- all this;
veditum -- to understand; icchami -- I wish; jñânam -- knowledge; jneyam -- the object of knowledge; ca - also; kesava -- O Krishna;
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Personality of Godhead said; idam -- this; sariram -- body; kaunteya -- O son of
Kuntî; ksetram -- the field; iti -- thus; abhidhiyate -- is called; etat -- this; yah -- one who; vetti -- knows;
tam -- he; prahuh -- is called; ksetra-jnah -- the knower of the field; iti -- thus; tat-vidah -- by those who
know this.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O my dear Krishna, I wish to know about prakriti [nature], purusa [the enjoyer], and the field
and the knower of the field, and of knowledge and the object of knowledge. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead said: This body, O son of Kuntî, is called the field, and one who knows this body is called the
knower of the field.
Text 3
Certainly you should understand Me as the knower of the field in all fields, o son of Bharata; that which is
of the field as well as of the knower of the field is true knowledge in My vision.
Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 1 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT:

ksetrajnam câpi mâm viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bhârata
ksetra-ksetrajnayor jnânam
yat taj jnânam matam mama

WORD FOR WORD
ksetra-jnam -- the knower of the field; ca -- also; api -- certainly; mam -- Me; viddhi -- know; sarva -- all;
ksetresu -- in bodily fields; bharata -- O son of Bharata; ksetra -- the field of activities (the body); ksetrajnayoh -- and the knower of the field; jñânam -- knowledge of; yat -- that which; tat -- that; jñânam -knowledge; matam -- opinion; mama -- My.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all bodies, and to understand this
body and its knower is called knowledge. That is My opinion.
Text 4
What that field of action actually is and what its changes are, where it is from and about him [the knower]
as also what his influence is, you may now in short hear from Me.
SANSKRIT:

tat ksetram yac ca yâdrk ca
yad-vikâri yatas ca yat
sa ca yo yat-prabhâas ca
tat samâena me srnu

WORD FOR WORD
tat -- that; ksetram -- field of activities; yat -- what; ca -- also; yadrk -- as it is; ca -- also; yat -- having
what; vikari -- changes; yatah -- from which; ca -- also; yat -- what; sah -- he; ca -- also; yah -- who; yat -having what; prabhavah -- influence; ca -- also; tat -- that; samasena -- in summary; me -- from Me; srnu - understand.
TRANSLATION
Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how it is constituted, what its changes
are, whence it is produced, who that knower of the field of activities is, and what his influences are.
Text 5-7
In many ways it is in the vedic hymns glorified by the sages and in different ways by the various aphorisms
of the holy scriptures affirmed in logic and reason: in summary do the basic elements, the false ego, the
intelligence and the unmanifest as surely also the eleven of the senses [the five senses of knowing and the
working ones of the voice, hands, legs, anus and genitals and the mind], the five sense objects [as sound
to the ear e.g.], like and dislike, happiness and distress, the combinations of them, the consciousness and
the determination, form the field of action with its [six] transformations [birth, youth, maturity, retreat,
old age and death]
SANSKRIT:

rsibhir bahudhâ gîtam
chandobhir vividhaih prthak
brahma-sûtra-padais caiva
hetumadbhir viniscitaih
mahâ-bhûtâny ahankâro
buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyâni dasaikam ca
panca cendriya-gocarâh

icchâ dvesah sukham duhkham
sanghâtas cetanâ dhrtih
etat ksetram samâsena
sa-vikâram udâhrtam
WORD FOR WORD
rsibhih -- by the wise sages; bahudha -- in many ways; gitam -- described; chandobhih -- by Vedic hymns;
vividhaih -- various; prthak -- variously; brahma-sutra -- of the Vedanta; padaih -- by the aphorisms; ca -also; eva -- certainly; hetu-madbhih -- with cause and effect; viniscitaih -- certain.
Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 2 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
maha-bhutani -- the great elements; ahankarah -- false ego; buddhih -- intelligence; avyaktam -- the
unmanifested; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; indriyani -- the senses; dasa-ekam -- eleven; ca -- also; panca -five; ca -- also; indriya-go-carah -- the objects of the senses;
iccha -- desire; dvesah -- hatred; sukham -- happiness; duhkham -- distress; sanghatah -- the aggregate;
cetana -- living symptoms; dhrtih -- conviction; etat -- all this; ksetram -- the field of activities; samasena
-- in summary; sa-vikaram -- with interactions; udahrtam -- exemplified.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of activities is described by various sages in
various Vedic writings. It is especially presented in Vedanta-sutra with all reasoning as to cause and
effect.The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the ten senses and the mind,
the five sense objects, desire, hatred, happiness, distress, the aggregate, the life symptoms, and
convictions -- all these are considered, in summary, to be the field of activities and its interactions.
Text 8-12
Humble, modest and nonviolent; peaceful, simple and loyal to the teacher of example; clean, steadfast,
and self-controlled; detached and unidentified with the sensory and surely aware of the defects and
miseries of birth, death, old age and disease; without preference or clinging to son, wife and home and
being constant and balanced in the realization of the wanted and unwanted; of an unalloyed unbroken
devotion unto Me also and going for secluded places without being attached to people in general; of
selfknowledge and stable in the realization of truth for the good of the divine encounter - all this is
declared to be of true knowledge and that which deviates from it is nescience.
SANSKRIT:

amânitvam adambhitvam
ahimsâ ksântir ârjavam
âcâryopâsanam saucam
sthairyam âtma-vinigrahah
indriyârthesu vairâgyam
anahankâra eva ca
janma-mrtyu-jarâ-vyâdhiduhkha-dosânudarshanam
asaktir anabhisvangah
putra-dâra-grhâdisu
nityam ca sama-cittatvam
istânistopapattisu
mayi cânanya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicârinî
vivikta-desa-sevitvam
aratir jana-samsadi
adhyâtma-jnâna-nityatvam
tattva-jnânârtha-darshanam
etaj jnânam iti proktam
ajnânam yad ato 'nyathâ

WORD FOR WORD
amanitvam -- humility; adambhitvam -- pridelessness; ahimsa -- nonviolence; ksantih -- tolerance; ariavam
-- simplicity; acarya-upasanam -- approaching a bona fide spiritual master; saucam -- cleanliness;
sthairyam -- steadfastness; atma-vinigrahah -- self-control;
indriya-arthesu -- in the matter of the senses; vairagyam -- renunciation; anahankarah -- being without
false egoism; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; janma -- of birth; mrtyu -- death; jara -- old age; vyadhi -- and
disease; duhkha -- of the distress; dosa -- the fault; anudarshanam -- observing;
asaktih -- being without attachment; anabhisvangah -- being without association; putra -- for son; dara -wife; grha-adisu -- home, etc.; nityam -- constant; ca -- also; sama-cittatvam -- equilibrium; ista -- the
desirable; anista -- and undesirable; upapattisu -- having obtained;
mayi -- unto Me; ca -- also; ananya-yogena -- by unalloyed devotional service; bhaktih -- devotion;
avyabhicarini -- without any break; vivikta -- to solitary; desa -- places; sevitvam -- aspiring; aratih -being without attachment; jana-samsadi -- to people in general;
adhyatma -- pertaining to the self; jñâna -- in knowledge; nityatvam -- constancy; tattva-jñâna -- of
knowledge of the truth; artha -- for the object; darshanam -- philosophy; etat -- all this; jñânam -Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 3 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
knowledge; iti -- thus; proktam -- declared; ajñânam -- ignorance; yat -- that which; atah -- from this;
anyatha -- other.
TRANSLATION
Humility; pridelessness; nonviolence; tolerance; simplicity; approaching a bona fide spiritual master;
cleanliness; steadiness; self-control; renunciation of the objects of sense gratification; absence of false
ego; the perception of the evil of birth, death, old age and disease; detachment; freedom from
entanglement with children, wife, home and the rest; even-mindedness amid pleasant and unpleasant
events; constant and unalloyed devotion to Me; aspiring to live in a solitary place; detachment from the
general mass of people; accepting , the importance of self-realization; and philosophical search for the
Absolute Truth -- all these I declare to be knowledge, and besides this whatever there may be is
ignorance.
Text 13
'I will now explain that which is to be known
and is subordinate to Me and of which is said
that it is neither the true nor the untrue;
knowing it one will taste the nectar of the
beginningless spiritual realm.
SANSKRIT:

jneyam yat tat pravaksyâmi
yaj jnâtvâ mrtam asnute
anâdimat-param brahma
na sat tan nâsad ucyate

WORD FOR WORD
jneyam -- the knowable; yat -- which; tat -that; pravaksyami -- I shall now explain; yat - which; jnatva -- knowing; amrtam -- nectar;
asnute -- one tastes; anadi -- beginningless;
mat-param -- subordinate to Me; brahma -spirit; na -- neither; sat -- cause; tat -- that;
na -- nor; asat -- effect; ucyate -- is said to
be.
TRANSLATION
I shall now explain the knowable, knowing
which you will taste the eternal. Brahman,
the spirit, beginningless and subordinate to
Me, lies beyond the cause and effect of this
material world.
Text 14
That which has hands, legs everywhere;
eyes, heads and faces all around and ears to
the world, pervades everything that exists.

SANSKRIT:

sarvatah pâni-pâdam tat
sarvato 'ksi-siro-mukham
sarvatah srutimal loke
sarvam âvrtya tisthati
WORD FOR WORD
sarvatah -- everywhere; pani -- hands; padam -- legs; tat -- that; sarvatah -- everywhere; aksi -- eyes;
sirah -- heads; mukham -- faces; sarvatah -- everywhere; sruti-mat -- having ears; loke -- in the world;
sarvam -- everything; avrtya -- covering; tisthati -- exists.
TRANSLATION
Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes, heads and faces, and He has ears everywhere. In this way the
Supersoul exists, pervading everything.
Text 15
Of all the senses and their qualities being the original source it is yet without all those senses and
unattached itself, and as the maintainer of each and certainly also being outside the modes of nature, it is
yet the master of the modes of matter itself.
Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 4 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT:

sarvendriya-gunâbhâsam
sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktam sarva-bhrc caiva
nirgunam guna-bhoktr ca

WORD FOR WORD
sarva -- of all; indriya -- senses; guna -- of the qualities; abhasam -- the original source; sarva -- all;
indriya -- senses; vivarjitam -- being without; asaktam -- without attachment; sarva-bhrt -- the maintainer
of everyone; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; nirgunam -- without material qualities; guna-bhoktr -- master of
the gunas; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses. He is unattached, although He
is the maintainer of all living beings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the
master of all the modes of material nature.
Text 16
Inside as well as being outside of the living entities, not moving and moving as well and not known of
being subtle, that being far away is also near as that.
SANSKRIT:

bahir antas ca bhûtânâm
acaram caram eva ca
sûksmatvât tad avijneyam
dûrastham cântike ca tat

WORD FOR WORD
bahih -- outside; antah -- inside; ca -- also; bhutanam -- of all living entities; acaram -- not moving; caram
-- moving; eva -- also; ca -- and; suksmatvat -- on account of being subtle; tat -- that; avijneyam -unknowable; dura-stham -- far away; ca -- also; antike -- near; ca -- and; tat -- that.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Truth exists outside and inside of all living beings, the moving and the nonmoving. Because
He is subtle, He is beyond the power of the material senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He
is also near to all.
Text 17
Undivided in all living beings it seems to be divided and while situated as the maintainer of all it is also to
be understood as devouring and developing all.
SANSKRIT:

avibhaktam ca bhûtesu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
bhûta-bhartr ca taj jneyam
grasisnu prabhavisnu ca
WORD FOR WORD
avibhaktam -- without division; ca -- also; bhutesu -- in all living beings; vibhaktam -- divided; iva -- as if;
ca -- also; sthitam -- situated; bhuta-bhartr -- the maintainer of all living entities; ca -- also; tat -- that;
jneyam -- to be understood; grasisnu -- devouring; prabhavisnu -- developing; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supersoul appears to be divided among all beings, He is never divided. He is situated as one.
Although He is the maintainer of every living entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops
all.
Text 18
It is also the source of light of all luminous objects and said to be beyond the darkness as the knowledge,
realized as the wisdom of this direct experience situated in the heart of everyone.
SANSKRIT:

jyotisâm api tajjyotis
tamasah param ucyate
jnânam jneyam jnâna-gamyam
hrdi sarvasya visthitam

WORD FOR WORD
jyotisam -- in all luminous objects; api -- also; tat -- that; jyotih -- the source of light; tamasah -- the
darkness; param -- beyond; ucyate -- is said; jñânam -- knowledge; jneyam -- to be known; jñâna-gamyam
-- to be approached by knowledge; hrdi -- in the heart; sarvasya -- of everyone; visthitam -- situated.
Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 5 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness of matter and is unmanifested.
He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in
everyone's heart.
Text 19
Thus the field as also the knowledge and what is to be known has been described in summary. My devotee
will, after understanding all of this, attain My nature.
SANSKRIT:

iti ksetram tathâ jnânam
jneyam coktam samâsatah
mad-bhakta etad vijnâya
mad-bhâvâyopapdyate

WORD FOR WORD
iti -- thus; ksetram -- the field of activities (the body); tatha -- also; jñânam -- knowledge; jneyam -- the
knowable; ca -- also; uktam -- described; samasatah -- in summary; mat-bhaktah -- My devotee; etat -- all
this; vijnaya -- after understanding; mat-bhavaya -- to My nature; upapadyate -- attains.
TRANSLATION
Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable have been summarily described by
Me. Only My devotees can understand this thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.
Text 20
Both material nature and the original person you must certainly know as beginningless and the
transformations and modes of nature surely as being produced by that material nature.
SANSKRIT:

prakritim purusam caiva
viddhyanâdî ubhâv api
vikârâms ca gunâms caiva
viddhi prakriti-sambhavân

WORD FOR WORD
prakritim -- material nature; purusam -- the living entities; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; viddhi -- you must
know; anadi -- without beginning; ubhau -- both; api -- also; vikaran -- transformations; ca -- also; gunan - the three modes of nature; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; viddhi -- know; prakriti -- material nature;
sambhavan -- produced of.
TRANSLATION
Both material nature and the original person you must certainly know as beginningless and the
transformations and modes of nature surely as being produced by that material nature.
Text 21
Material nature is said to be the reason of cause and effect in the matter of creation, while the original
person is said to be the reason of happiness and distress in the experiencing.
SANSKRIT:

kârya-kârana-kartrtve
hetuh prakritir ucyate
purusah sukha-duhkhânâm
bhoktrtve hetur ucyate

WORD FOR WORD
karya -- of effect; karana -- and cause; kartrtve -- in the matter of creation; hetuh -- the instrument;
prakritih -- material nature; ucyate -- is said to be; purusah -- the living entity; sukha -- of happiness;
duhkhanam -- and distress; bhoktrtve -- in enjoyment; hetuh -- the instrument; ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
Nature is said to be the cause of all material causes and effects, whereas the living entity is the cause of
the various sufferings and enjoyments in this world.
Text 22
Of the original person being situated in the material energy one certainly enjoys by the qualities of that
material nature and consequently of the attachment to it one is of the channels of birth in the true and
untrue.
SANSKRIT:

purusah prakriti-stho hi
bhunkte prakriti-jân gunân

Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 6 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

kâranam guna-sango 'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
WORD FOR WORD
purusah -- the living entity; prakriti-sthah -- being situated in the material energy; hi -- certainly; bhunkte
-- enjoys; prakriti-jan -- produced by the material nature; gunan -- the modes of nature; karanam -- the
cause; guna-sangah -- the association with the modes of nature; asya -- of the living entity; sat-asat -- in
good and bad; yoni -- species of life; janmasu -- in births.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the three modes of nature. This
is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various
species.
Text 23
As the witness and allower, supporter and enjoyer, the Great Lord and Supersoul, is indeed the
transcendental original person said to be also present in this body.
SANSKRIT:

upadrastanumanta ca
bharta bhokta mahesvarah
paramatmeti capy ukto
dehe 'smin purusah parah

WORD FOR WORD
upadrasta -- overseer; anumanta -- permitter; ca -- also; bharta -- master; bhokta -- supreme enjoyer;
maha-isvarah -- the Supreme Lord; parama-atma -- the Supersoul; iti -- also; ca -- and; api -- indeed;
uktah -- is said; dehe -- in the body; asmin -- this; purusah -- enjoyer; parah -- transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer, who is the Lord, the supreme proprietor, who
exists as the overseer and permitter, and who is known as the Supersoul.
Text 24
Anyone who thus understands the original person, material nature and its qualities will, despite of
however one is situated, never take birth again.
SANSKRIT:

ya evam vetti purusam
prakritim ca gunaih saha
sarvathâ vartamâno 'pi
na sa bhûyo 'bhijayâte
WORD FOR WORD
yah -- anyone who; evam -- thus; vetti -- understands; purusam -- the living entity; prakritim -- material
nature; ca -- and; gunaih -- the modes of material nature; saha -- with; sarvatha -- in all ways;
vartamanah -- being situated; api -- in spite of; na -- never; sah -- he; bhuyah -- again; abhijayate -- takes
his birth.
TRANSLATION
One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the living entity and the interaction of
the modes of nature is sure to attain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of his present
position.
Text 25
Some do by meditation see the Supersoul within themselves, others do so by minding exercises of yogic
analysis, and still others do so by acting in giving up the fruits of action.
SANSKRIT:

dhyânenâtmani pasyanti
kecid âtmânam âtmanâ
anye sânkhyena yogena
karma-yogena câpare

WORD FOR WORD
dhyanena -- by meditation; atmani -- within the self; pasyanti -- see; kecit -- some; atmanam -- the
Supersoul; atmana -- by the mind; anye -- others; sankhyena -- of philosophical discussion; yogena -- by
the yoga system; karma-yogena -- by activities without fruitive desire; ca -- also; apare -- others.
Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 7 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Some perceive the Supersoul within themselves through meditation, others through the cultivation of
knowledge, and still others through working without fruitive desires.
Text 26
But others who do not know of all this begin to worship by hearing from others and as well transcend for
sure the path of death in affinity with that process of hearing.
SANSKRIT:

anye tv evam ajânantah
srutvânyebhya upâsate
te 'pi câtitaranty eva
mrtyum sruti-parâyanâh
WORD FOR WORD
anye -- others; tu -- but; evam -- thus; ajanantah -- without spiritual knowledge; srutva -- by hearing;
anyebhyah -- from others; upasate -- begin to worship; te -- they; api -- also; ca -- and; atitaranti -transcend; eva -- certainly; mrtyum -- the path of death; sruti-parayanah -- inclined to the process of
hearing.
TRANSLATION
Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme
Person upon hearing about Him from others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they also
transcend the path of birth and death.
Text 27
O chief of the Bhâratas, whatever comes into being, anything existing that is animate or inanimate, you
must know as a combination of the knower [called purusha or the original person] and the field [called
prakriti or material nature].
SANSKRIT:

yâvat sanjâyate kincit
sattvam sthâvara-jangamam
ksetra-ksetrajna-samyogât
tad viddhi bharatarsabha

WORD FOR WORD
yavat -- whatever; sanjayate -- comes into being; kincit -- anything; sattvam -- existence; sthavara -- not
moving; jangamam -- moving; ksetra -- of the body; ksetra-jna -- and the knower of the body; samyogat -by the union between; tat viddhi -- you must know it; bharata-rsabha -- O chief of the Bhâratas.
TRANSLATION
O chief of the Bhâratas, know that whatever you see in existence, both the moving and the nonmoving, is
only a combination of the field of activities and the knower of the field.
Text 28
He who sees that the imperishable Lord of the beyond is equally present in the perishable of all living
beings, truly sees..
SANSKRIT:

samam sarvesu bhûtesu
tisthantam paramesvaram
vinasyatsv avinasyantam
yah pasyati sa pasyati

WORD FOR WORD
samam -- equally; sarvesu -- in all; bhutesu -- living entities; tisthantam -- residing; parama-isvaram -- the
Supersoul; vinasyatsu -- in the destructible; avinasyantam -- not destroyed; yah -- anyone who; pasyati -sees; sah -- he; pasyati -- actually sees.
TRANSLATION
One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all bodies, and who understands that
neither the soul nor the Supersoul within the destructible body is ever destroyed, actually sees.
Text 29
He who for sure sees the Lord equally in all does not lose his selfrespect with the soul and consequently
reaches the goal of transcendence.
SANSKRIT:

samam pasyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam îsvaram
Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 8 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

na hinasty âtmanâtmânam
tato yâti parâm gatim
WORD FOR WORD
samam -- equally; pasyan -- seeing; hi -- certainly; sarvatra -- everywhere; samavasthitam -- equally
situated; isvaram -- the Supersoul; na -- does not; hinasti -- degrade; atmana -- by the mind; atmanam -the soul; tatah -- then; yati -- reaches; param -- the transcendental; gatim -- destination.
TRANSLATION
One who sees the Supersoul equally present everywhere, in every living being, does not degrade himself
by his mind. Thus he approaches the transcendental destination.
Text 30
Anyone who sees that all activities certainly in all respects are the result of material conditioning and that
one as the soul is not the doer, sees perfectly.
SANSKRIT:

prakrtyaiva ca karmâni
kriyamânâni sarvasah
yah pasyati tathâtmânam
akartâram sa pasyati

WORD FOR WORD
prakrtya -- by material nature; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; karmani -- activities; kriyamanani -- being
performed; sarvasah -- in all respects; yah -- anyone who; pasyati -- sees; tatha -- also; atmanam -himself; akartaram -- the nondoer; sah -- he; pasyati -- sees perfectly.
TRANSLATION
Wie zien kan dat alle aktiviteiten worden verricht door het lichaam, dat door de stoffelijke natuur
geschapen is, en ziet dat het zelf niets doet, ziet de dingen zoals ze zijn.
Text 31
When one following that tries to see that the diversity of the living beings is resting in oneness and that it
expanded to that reality, at that time one attains the Absolute of the Spirit.
SANSKRIT:

yadâ bhûta-prthag-bhâvam
eka-stham anupasyati
tata eva ca vistâram
brahma sampadyate tadâ
WORD FOR WORD
yada -- when; bhuta -- of living entities; prthak-bhavam -- separated identities; eka-stham -- situated in
one; anupasyati -- one tries to see through authority; tatah eva -- thereafter; ca -- also; vistaram -- the
expansion; brahma -- the Absolute; sampadyate -- he attains; tada -- at that time.
TRANSLATION
When a sensible man ceases to see different identities due to different material bodies and he sees how
beings are expanded everywhere, he attains to the Brahman conception.
Text 32
This inexhaustible soul is because of being beginningless and its freedom from the modes of nature of the
beyond; although embodied, o son of Kuntî, it never does anything nor is it entangled.
SANSKRIT:

anâditvân nirgunatvât
paramâtmâyam avyayah
sarîra-stho 'pi kaunteya
na karoti na lipyate

WORD FOR WORD
anaditvat -- due to eternity; nirgunatvat -- due to being transcendental; parama -- beyond material
nature; atma -- spirit; ayam -- this; avyayah -- inexhaustible; sarira-sthah -- dwelling in the body; api -though; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; na karoti -- never does anything; na lipyate -- nor is he entangled.
TRANSLATION
Those with the vision of eternity can see that the imperishable soul is transcendental, eternal, and beyond
the modes of nature. Despite contact with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither does anything nor
is entangled.
Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 9 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 33
As the ether is all pervading and in its subtlety never mixes with anything, so does the soul within the
body never mix.
SANSKRIT:

yathâ sarva-gatam sauksmyâd
âkâsam nopalipyate
sarvatrâvasthito dehe
tathâtmâ nopalipyate

WORD FOR WORD
yatha -- as; sarva-gatam -- all-pervading; sauksmyat -- due to being subtle; akasam -- the sky; na -- never;
upalipyate -- mixes; sarvatra -- everywhere; avasthitah -- situated; dehe -- in the body; tatha -- so; atma - the self; na -- never; upalipyate -- mixes.
TRANSLATION
The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although it is all-pervading. Similarly, the
soul situated in Brahman vision does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.
Text 34
Like one sun illumining the whole world, so does the soul within this body similarly illumine all, o son of
Bharata.
SANSKRIT:

yathâ prakâsayaty ekah
krtsnam lokam imam ravih
ksetram ksetrî tathâ krtsnam
prakâsayati bhârata
WORD FOR WORD
yatha -- as; prakasayati -- illuminates; ekah -- one; krtsnam -- the whole; lokam -- universe; imam -- this;
ravih -- sun; ksetram -- this body; ksetri -- the soul; tatha -- similarly; krtsnam -- all; prakasayati -illuminates; bharata -- O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so does the living entity, one within the
body, illuminate the entire body by consciousness.
Text 35
Those who, by the vision of knowledge, thus know of the difference between the field and the knower of
the field and about the liberation of the living being from [suffering the] material nature; they reach the
Supreme.
SANSKRIT:

ksetra-ksetrajnayor evam
antaram jnâna-caksusâ
bhûta-prakriti-moksam ca
ye vidur yânti te param
WORD FOR WORD
ksetra -- of the body; ksetra-jnayoh -- of the proprietor of the body; evam -- thus; antaram -- the
difference; jñâna-caksusa -- by the vision of knowledge; bhuta -- of the living entity; prakriti -- from
material nature; moksam -- the liberation; ca -- also; ye -- those who; viduh -- know; yanti -- approach; te
-- they; param -- the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
Those who, trough spiritual insight, thus know of the difference between the field and the knower of the
field and know about the liberation of the living being from [suffering] material nature; they reach the
Supreme.

Chapter13 - The Yoga of Discrimination

…Page 10 of 10

The Bhagavad Gita

Chapter 14

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

On the inherent qualities of material nature
Text 1
The Supreme Lord said: ' Again about the transcendental, I will tell you, of all knowledge the utmost
knowledge, knowing which all the sages from this world attained.
SANSKRIT:

srî-bhagavân uvâca
param bhûyah pravaksyâmi
jnânânâm jnânam uttamam
yaj jnâtvâ munayah sarve
parâm siddhimn ito gatâh
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; param -transcendental; bhuyah -- again;
pravaksyami -- I shall speak; jñânanam -- of all knowledge; jñânam -- knowledge; uttamam -- the
supreme; yat -- which; jnatva -- knowing; munayah -- the sages; sarve -- all; param -- transcendental;
siddhim -- perfection; itah -- from this world; gatah -- attained.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme wisdom, the best of
all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have attained the supreme perfection.
Text 2
Taking shelter of this knowledge, having attained to My selfsame nature, one is not born at the time of
creation, nor is one lost on annihilation.
SANSKRIT:

idam jnânam upâsritya
mama sâdharmyam âgatâh
sarge 'pi nopajâyante
pralaye na vyathanti ca

WORD FOR WORD
idam -- this; jñânam -- knowledge; upasritya -- taking shelter of; mama -- My; sadharmyam -- same
nature; agatah -- having attained; sarge api -- even in the creation; na -- never; upajayante -- are born;
pralaye -- in the annihilation; na -- nor; vyathanti -- are disturbed; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the transcendental nature like My own. Thus
established, one is not born at the time of creation or disturbed at the time of dissolution.
Text 3
My channel of birth is the total material existence and of the Supreme in that I impregnate, creating the
conditions of all living entities who find thereafter their existence, o son of Bharata.
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 1 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT:

mama yonir mahad brahma
tasmin garbham dadhâmy aham
sambhavah sarva-bhûtânâm
tato bhavati bhârata

WORD FOR WORD
mama -- My; yonih -- source of birth; mahat -- the total material existence; brahma -- supreme; tasmin -in that; garbham -- pregnancy; dadhami -- create; aham -- I; sambhavah -- the possibility; sarva-bhutanam
-- of all living entities; tatah -- thereafter; bhavati -- becomes; bharata -- O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is that Brahman that I
impregnate, making possible the births of all living beings, O son of Bharata.
Text 4
Of all that are born, o son of Kuntî, of all the forms that manifest, am I the creator, the source of birth
and the seed-giving father.
SANSKRIT:

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
mûrtayah sambhavanti yâh
tâsâm brahma mahad yonir
aham bîja-pradah pitâ
WORD FOR WORD
sarva-yonisu -- in all species of life; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; murtayah -- forms; sambhavanti -- they
appear; yah -- which; tasam -- of all of them; brahma -- the supreme; mahat yonih -- source of birth in the
material substance; aham -- I; bija-pradah -- the seed-giving; pita -- father.
TRANSLATION
It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kuntî, are made possible by birth in this material
nature, and that I am the seed-giving father.
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 2 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text5
The modes of goodness (sattva), passion (rajas) and ignorance (tamas) are the qualities produced by
material nature which condition, o mighty armed one, this body of the imperishable living being.
SANSKRIT:

sattvam rajas tama iti
gunâh prakriti-sambhavâh
nibadhnanti mahâ-bâho
dehe dehinam avyayam

WORD FOR WORD
sattvam -- the mode of goodness; rajah -- the mode of passion; tamah -- the mode of ignorance; iti -thus; gunah -- the qualities; prakriti -- material nature; sambhavah -- produced of; nibadhnanti -- do
condition; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; dehe -- in this body; dehinam -- the living entity; avyayam - eternal.
TRANSLATION
Material nature consists of three modes -- goodness, passion and ignorance. When the eternal living entity
comes in contact with nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, he becomes conditioned by these modes.
Text6
Of them, is the mode of goodness the purest, it illumines without reactions, and conditions with a sense of
happiness the feeling for knowledge, o sinless one.
SANSKRIT:

tatra sattvam nirmalatvât
prakâsakam anâmayam
sukha-sangena badhnâti
jnâna-sangena cânagha

WORD FOR WORD
tatra -- there; sattvam -- the mode of goodness; nirmalatvat -- being purest in the material world;
prakasakam -- illuminating; anamayam -- without any sinful reaction; sukha -- with happiness; sangena -by association; badhnati -- conditions; jñâna -- with knowledge; sangena -- by association; ca -- also;
anagha -- O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is illuminating, and it frees one from all
sinful reactions. Those situated in that mode become conditioned by a sense of happiness and knowledge.
Text7
Know that the mode of passion is characterized by desires, born from attachment and longing, that bind,
o son of Kuntî, the one embodied to the outcome of the deeds in the past.
SANSKRIT:

rajo râgâtmakam viddhi
trsnâ-sanga-samudbhavam
tan nibadhnâti kaunteya
karma-sangena dehinam

WORD FOR WORD
rajah -- the mode of passion; raga-atmakam -- born of desire or lust; viddhi -- know; trsna -- with
hankering; sanga -- association; samudbhavam -- produced of; tat -- that; nibadhnati -- binds; kaunteya -O son of Kuntî; karma-sangena -- by association with fruitive activity; dehinam -- the embodied.
TRANSLATION
The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of Kuntî, and because of this the
embodied living entity is bound to material fruitive actions.
Text 8
The mode of ignorance is the result of lack of knowledge; know it as deluding all embodied beings, binding
them to carelessness, indolence and [more than six hours of] sleep, o son of Bharata.
SANSKRIT:

tamas tv ajnâna-jam viddhi
mohanam sarva-dehinâm
pramâdâlasya-nidrâbhis
tan nibadhnâti bhârata
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 3 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
tamah -- the mode of ignorance; tu -- but; ajñâna-jam -- produced of ignorance; viddhi -- know; mohanam
-- the delusion; sarva-dehinam -- of all embodied beings; pramada -- with madness; alasya -- indolence;
nidrabhih -- and sleep; tat -- that; nibadhnati -- binds; bharata -- O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bharata, know that the mode of darkness, born of ignorance, is the delusion of all embodied
living entities. The results of this mode are madness, indolence and sleep, which bind the conditioned
soul.
Text 9
The mode of goodness conditions one to happiness, passion binds one to fruitive activities, o son of
Bharata, but from the ignorance that covers the knowledge one is bound to errors.
SANSKRIT:

sattvam sukhe sanjayati
rajah karmani bhârata
jnânam âvrtya tu tamah
pramâde sanjayaty uta

WORD FOR WORD
sattvam -- the mode of goodness; sukhe -- in happiness; sanjayati -- binds; rajah -- the mode of passion;
karmani -- in fruitive activity; bharata -- O son of Bharata; jñânam -- knowledge; avrtya -- covering; tu -but; tamah -- the mode of ignorance; pramade -- in madness; sanjayati -- binds; uta -- it is said.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bharata, the mode of goodness conditions one to happiness; passion conditions one to fruitive
action; and ignorance, covering one's knowledge, binds one to madness.
Text 10
Then goodness prevails defeating passion and ignorance, then o son of Bharata, ignorance does so with
passion and goodness and then passion overrules goodness as well as the ignorance; this is how the modes
of sattva, rajas and tamas are.
SANSKRIT:

rajas tamas câbhibhûya
sattvam bhavati bhârata
rajah sattvam tamas caiva
tamah sattvam rajas tathâ
WORD FOR WORD
rajah -- the mode of passion; tamah -- the mode of ignorance; ca -- also; abhibhuya -- surpassing; sattvam
-- the mode of goodness; bhavati -- becomes prominent; bharata -- O son of Bharata; rajah -- the mode of
passion; sattvam -- the mode of goodness; tamah -- the mode of ignorance; ca -- also; eva -- like that;
tamah -- the mode of ignorance; sattvam -- the mode of goodness; rajah -- the mode of passion; tatha -thus.
TRANSLATION
Nu eens heeft de geaardheid hartstocht de overhand en verdrijft de geaardheid goedheid, O zoon van
Bharata. Dan weer verdrijft de geaardheid goedheid de hartstocht, en ook kan de geaardheid
onwetendheid zowel goedheid als hartstocht verdrijven. Zo is er altijd strijd om de heerschappij.
Text 11
When to all the gates of the body the enlightenment of knowledge develops, at that time one says is the
mode of goodness prevailing.
SANSKRIT:

sarva-dvâresu dehe 'smin
prakâsa upajâyate
jnânam yadâ tadâ vidyâd
vivrddham sattvam ity uta
WORD FOR WORD
sarva-dvaresu -- in all the gates; dehe asmin -- in this body; prakasah -- the quality of illumination;
upajayate -- develops; jñânam -- knowledge; yada -- when; tada -- at that time; vidyat -- know;
vivrddham -- increased; sattvam -- the mode of goodness; iti uta -- thus it is said.
TRANSLATION
The manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all the gates of the body are
illuminated by knowledge.
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 4 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 12
Greed, overexertion, enterprising and restless desire all develop when the mode of passion predominates,
o chief of the Bhâratas
SANSKRIT:

lobhah pravrttir ârambhah
karmanâm asamah sprhâ
rajasy etâni jâyante
vivrddhe bharatarsabha

WORD FOR WORD
lobhah -- greed; pravrttih -- activity; arambhah -- endeavor; karmanam -- in activities; asamah -uncontrollable; sprha -- desire; rajasi -- of the mode of passion; etani -- all these; jayante -- develop;
vivrddhe -- when there is an excess; bharata-rsabha -- O chief of the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O chief of the Bhâratas, when there is an increase in the mode of passion the symptoms of great
attachment, fruitive activity, intense endeavor, and uncontrollable desire and hankering develop.
Text 13
Darkness, slowness, negligence and surely illusion too manifest themselves when the mode of ignorance is
developed, o son of Kuru.
SANSKRIT:

aprakâso 'pravrttis ca
pramâdo moha eva ca
tamasy etâni jâyante
vivrddhe kuru-nandana

WORD FOR WORD

aprakasah -- darkness; apravrttih -inactivity; ca -- and; pramadah -madness; mohah -- illusion; eva -certainly; ca -- also; tamasi -- the
mode of ignorance; etani -- these;
jayante -- are manifested; vivrddhe
-- when developed; kuru-nandana -O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATION
When there is an increase in the
mode of ignorance, O son of Kuru,
darkness, inertia, madness and
illusion are manifested.
Text 14
When with the development of the
mode of goodness the embodied one
finds dissolution, then one attains
the world of those who are pure and
of great wisdom.
SANSKRIT:

yadâ sattve pravrddhe tu
pralayam yâti deha-bhrt
tadottama-vidâm lokân
amalân pratipadyate
WORD FOR WORD
yada -- when; sattve -- the mode of
goodness; pravrddhe -- developed;
tu -- but; pralayam -- dissolution;
yati -- goes; deha-bhrt -- the
embodied; tada -- at that time;
uttama-vidam -- of the great sages;
lokan -- the planets; amalan -- pure;
pratipadyate -- attains.
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 5 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher planets of the great sages.
Text 15
When one is in passion finding ones end, one takes birth among those who work for material results and
similarly when one is in ignorance one takes birth among the ignorant.
SANSKRIT:

rajasi pralayam gatvâ
karma-sangisu jâyate
tathâ pralînas tamasi
mûdha-yonisu jâyate

WORD FOR WORD
rajasi -- in passion; pralayam -- dissolution; gatva -- attaining; karma-sangisu -- in the association of those
engaged in fruitive activities; jayate -- takes birth; tatha -- similarly; pralinah -- being dissolved; tamasi -in ignorance; mudha-yonisu -- in animal species; jayate -- takes birth.
TRANSLATION
When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those engaged in fruitive activities; and when
one dies in the mode of ignorance, he takes birth in the animal kingdom.
Text 16
Of pious activities in the mode of goodness is said that one is purified, the mode of passion results in
misery and stupidity is the result of the mode of ignorance.
SANSKRIT:

karmanah sukrtasyâhuh
sâttvikam nirmalam phalam
rajasas tu phalam duhkham
ajnânam tamasah phalam
WORD FOR WORD
karmanah -- of work; su-krtasya -- pious; ahuh -- is said; sattvikam -- in the mode of goodness; nirmalam -purified; phalam -- the result; rajasah -- of the mode of passion; tu -- but; phalam -- the result; duhkham
-- misery; ajñânam -- nonsense; tamasah -- of the mode of ignorance; phalam -- the result.
TRANSLATION
Door te handelen in de geaardheid goedheid raakt men gelouterd. Werk dat men doet in de geaardheid
hartstocht leidt tot verdriet, en aktiviteiten in de geaardheid onwetendheid leiden tot dwaasheid.
Text 17
The way from the mode of goodness knowledge develops and greed surely develops from the mode of
passion, so do illusion and certainly perplexity develop from the mode of ignorance.
SANSKRIT:

sattvât sanjâyate jnânam
rajaso lobha eva ca
pramâda-mohau tamaso
bhavato 'jnânam eva ca
WORD FOR WORD
sattvat -- from the mode of goodness; sanjayate -- develops; jñânam -- knowledge; rajasah -- from the
mode of passion; lobhah -- greed; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; pramada -- madness; mohau -- and
illusion;tamasah -- from the mode of ignorance; bhavatah -- develop; ajñânam -- nonsense; eva -certainly; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of passion, greed develops; and
from the mode of ignorance develop foolishness, madness and illusion.
Text 18
Those in the mode of goodness rise up, those in passion stay in between while the ones in ignorance whose
occupation is of an abominable quality go down.
SANSKRIT:

ûrdhvam gacchanti sattva-sthâ
madhye tisthanti râjasâh
jaghanya-guna-vrtti sthâ
adho gacchanti tâmasâh
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 6 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
urdhvam -- upwards; gacchanti -- go; sattva-sthah -- those situated in the mode of goodness; madhye -- in
the middle; tisthanti -- dwell; rajasah -- those situated in the mode of passion; jaghanya -- of abominable;
guna -- quality; vrtti-sthah -- whose occupation; adhah -- down; gacchanti -- go; tamasah -- persons in the
mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher planets; those in the mode of
passion live on the earthly planets; and those in the abominable mode of ignorance go down to the hellish
worlds.
Text 19
When a seer properly sees that the doer is no one other than these three qualities to the modes of nature
and knows the beyond, he is promoted to My spiritual nature.
SANSKRIT:

nânyam gunebhyah kartâram
yadâ drastânupasyati
gunebhyas ca param vetti
mad-bhâvam so 'dhigacchati
WORD FOR WORD
na -- no; anyam -- other; gunebhyah -- than the qualities; kartaram -- performer; yada -- when; drasta -- a
seer; anupasyati -- sees properly; gunebhyah -- to the modes of nature; ca -- and; param -transcendental; vetti -- knows; mat-bhavam -- to My spiritual nature; sah -- he; adhigacchati -- is
promoted.
TRANSLATION
When one properly sees that in all activities no other performer is at work than these modes of nature and
he knows the Supreme Lord, who is transcendental to all these modes, he attains My spiritual nature.
Text 20
Transcending all three qualities the embodied one will enjoy the nectar of being freed from the physical
result of the distress of birth, death and old age.'
SANSKRIT:

gunân etân atîtya trîn
dehî deha-samudbhavân
janma-mrtyu jarâ-duhkhair
vimukto 'mrtam asnute
WORD FOR WORD
gunan -- qualities; etan -- all these; atitya -- transcending; trin -- three; dehi -- the embodied; deha -- the
body; samudbhavan -- produced of; janma -- of birth; mrtyu -- death; jara -- and old age; duhkhaih -- the
distresses; vimuktah -- being freed from; amrtam -- nectar; asnute -- he enjoys.
TRANSLATION
When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes associated with the material body, he
can become free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and can enjoy nectar even in this life.
Text 21
Arjuna said: 'By which symptoms is the one that transcended the qualities recognized, o master, what is
his conduct and how does he rise above these three modes?'
SANSKRIT:

arjuna uvâca
kair lingais trîn gunân etân
atîto bhavati prabho
kim âcârah katham caitâms
trîn gunân ativartate
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; kaih -- by which; lingaih -- symptoms; trin -- three; gunan -- qualities; etan - all these; atitah -- having transcended; bhavati -- is; prabho -- O my Lord; kim -- what; acarah -behavior; katham -- how; ca -- also; etan -- these; trin -- three; gunan -- qualities; ativartate -transcends.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna inquired: O my dear Lord, by which symptoms is one known who is transcendental to these three
modes? What is his behavior? And how does he transcend the modes of nature?
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 7 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 22-25
The Supreme Lord said: 'He who, despite of their development, does not hate the revelation [from
goodness] nor the attachment [of passion] nor the illusion [of ignorance], o son of Pându, nor desires to
stop that development; one who, knowing that the qualities are acting, is never agitated by them staying
the witness in continuing selfperception; he who equal in distress and happiness from within is equal
about a clod, a stone or gold, who is the same towards what is desirable and what is undesirable and
steady and equal under criticism and praise for himself; he who is equal in honor and dishonor and equal
towards both sides of friends and enemies and is renounced in all his endeavors - he is said to be
transcendental to the modes.
SANSKRIT:

srî-bhagavân uvâca
prakâsam ca pravrttim ca
moham eva ca pândava
na dvesti sampravrttâni
na nivrttâni kânksati
udâsînavad âsîno
gunair yo na vicâlyate
gunâ vartanta ity evam
yo 'vatisthati nengate

sama-duhkha-sukhah sva-sthah
sama-lostâsma-kâncanah
tulya-priyâpriyo dhîras
tulya-nindâtma-samstutih
mânâpamânayos tulyas
tulyo mitrâri-paksayoh
sarvârambha-parityâgî
gunâtîtah sa ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prakasam -- illumination; ca -- and;
pravrttim -- attachment; ca -- and; moham -- illusion; eva ca -- also; pandava -- O son of Pandu; na dvesti
-- does not hate; sampravrttani -- although developed; na nivrttani -- nor stopping development; kanksati
-- desires;
udasina-vat -- as if neutral; asinah -- situated; gunaih -- by the qualities; yah -- one who; na -- never;
vicalyate -- is agitated; gunah -- the qualities; vartante -- are acting; iti evam -- knowing thus; yah -- one
who; avatisthati -- remains; na -- never; ingate -- flickers;
sama -- equal; duhkha -- in distress; sukhah -- and happiness; sva-sthah -- being situated in himself; sama - equally; losta -- a lump of earth; asma -- stone; kancanah -- gold; tulya -- equally disposed; priya -- to
the dear; apriyah -- and the undesirable; dhirah -- steady; tulya -- equal; ninda -- in defamation; atmasamstutih -- and praise of himself;
mana -- in honor; apamanayoh -- and dishonor; tulyah -- equal; tuiyah -- equal; mitra -- of friends; ari -and enemies; paksayoh -- to the parties; sarva -- of all; arambha -- endeavors; parityagi -- renouncer;
guna-atitah -- transcendental to the material modes of nature; sah -- he; ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O son of Pandu, he who does not hate illumination, attachment
and delusion when they are present or long for them when they disappear; who is unwavering and
undisturbed through all these reactions of the material qualities, remaining neutral and transcendental,
knowing that the modes alone are active; who is situated in the self and regards alike happiness and
distress; who looks upon a lump of earth, a stone and a piece of gold with an equal eye; who is equal
toward the desirable and the undesirable; who is steady, situated equally well in praise and blame, honor
and dishonor; who treats alike both friend and enemy; and who has renounced all material activities -such a person is said to have transcended the modes of nature.
Text 26
A person who unswerving renders service in devotion unto Me - he, transcending all these modes of
nature, will rise to the spiritual platform.
Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 8 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT:

mâm ca yo 'vyabhicârena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunân samatîtyaitân
brahma-bhûyâya kalpate
WORD FOR WORD
mam -- unto Me; ca -- also; yah -- a person who; avyabhicarena -- without fail; bhakti-yogena -- by
devotional service; sevate -- renders ,service; sah -- he; gunan -- the modes of material nature; samatitya
-- transcending; etan -- all these; brahma-bhuyaya -- elevated to the Brahman platform; kalpate -becomes.
TRANSLATION
One who engages in full devotional service, unfailing in all circumstances, at once transcends the modes
of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman.
Text 27
For certain I am the base of the spiritual, the immortal and the imperishable, the original nature and the
ultimate happiness.
SANSKRIT:

brahmano hi pratisthâham
amrtasyâvyayasya ca
sâsvatasya ca dharmasya
sukhasyaikântikasya ca
WORD FOR WORD
brahmanah -- of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi -- certainly; pratistha -- the rest; aham -- I am; amrtasya - of the immortal; avyayasya -- of the imperishable; ca -- also; sasvatasya -- of the eternal; ca -- and;
dharmasya -- of the constitutional position; sukhasya -- of happiness; aikantikasya -- ultimate; ca -- also.
TRANSLATION
And I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is immortal, imperishable and eternal and is the
constitutional position of ultimate happiness.

Chapter14 - The Yoga of the Three Modes of nature

…Page 9 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Chapter 15

The Yoga of the Supreme Person

About the realization of the characteristics, virtue and glory of God
Text 1
The Supreme Lord said: 'Anyone who knows that the as'vattha is said to be an imperishable [banyan-]tree
that has its roots upwards, its branches downwards and of which the leaves are the vedic hymns, knows
the Vedas.
SANSKRIT

srî bhagavân uvâca
ûrdhva-mûlam adhah-sâkham
as'vattham prâhur avyayam
chandâmsi yasya parnâni
yas tam veda sa veda-vit
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; urdhva-mulam -- with roots above; adhah
-- downwards; sakham -- branches; as'vattham -- a banyan tree; prahuh -- is said; avyayam -- eternal;
chandamsi -- the Vedic hymns; yasya -- of which; parnani -- the leaves; yah -- anyone who; tam -- that;
veda -- knows; sah -- he veda-vit -- the knower of the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: It is said that there is an imperishable banyan tree that has its
roots upward and its branches down and whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One who knows this tree is
the knower of the Vedas.
Text 2
Extending downward and upward, its branches by the modes of nature downwards developed twigs as the
senseobjects and to the extending roots [upwards] the karma that binds one to the human world.
SANSKRIT

adhas cordhvam prasrtâs tasya sâkhâ
guna-pravrddhâ visaya-pravâlâh
adhas ca mûlâny anusantatâni
karmânubandhîni manusya-loke

WORD FOR WORD
adhah -- downward; ca -- and; urdhvam -- upward; prasrtah -- extended; tasya -- its; sakhah -- branches;
guna -- by the modes of material nature; pravrddhah -- developed; visaya -- sense objects; pravalah -twigs; adhah -- downward; ca -- and; mulani -- roots; anusantatani -- extended; karma -- to work;
anubandhini -- bound; manusya-loke -- in the world of human society.

Chapter15 - The Yoga of the Supreme Person

…Page 1 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the three modes of material nature.
The twigs are the objects of the senses. This tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to the
fruitive actions of human society.

Text3-4
The form of this tree which is without a beginning or end cannot be perceived in this world nor can one
see how it is maintained; this strongly rooted Banyan must be cut by the weapon of detachment. After
doing so one has to find out about that place for which one is going and from where one never returns and
then surrender to Him, the Primordial Original Person, from whom everything extended since time
immemorial.
SANSKRIT

na rûpam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nânto na câdir na ca sampratisthâ
as'vattham enam suvirûdha-mûlam
asanga-sastrena drdhena chittvâ
Chapter15 - The Yoga of the Supreme Person

…Page 2 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

tatah padam tat parimârgitavyam
yasmin gatâ na nivartanti bhûyah
tam eva câdyam purusam prapadye
yatah pravrttih prasrtâ purânî
WORD FOR WORD
na -- not; rupam -- the form; asya -- of this tree; iha -- in this world; tatha -- also; upalabhyate -- can be
perceived; na -- never; antah -- end; na -- never; ca -- also; adih -- beginning; na -- never; ca -- also;
sampratistha -- the foundation; as'vattham -- banyan tree; enam -- this; su-virudha -- strongly; mulam -rooted; asanga-sastrena-- by the weapon of detachment; drdhena -- strong; chittva -- cutting;
tatah -- thereafter; padam -- situation; tat -- that; parimargitavyam -- has to be searched out; yasmin -where; gatah -- going; na -- never; nivartanti -- they come back; bhuyah -- again; tam -- to Him; eva -certainly; ca -- also; adyam -- original; purusam -- the Personality of Godhead; prapadye -- surrender;
yatah -- from whom; pravrttih -- the beginning; prasrta -- extended; purani -- very old.
TRANSLATION
The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can understand where it ends, where
it begins, or where its foundation is. But with determination one must cut down this strongly rooted tree
with the weapon of detachment. Thereafter, one must seek that place from which, having gone, one
never returns, and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead from whom everything began
and from whom everything has extended since time immemorial.
Text 5
Without pride and its illusion, having overcome bad association, understanding the eternal, dissociated
from the lust and liberated from identifying with the dualities of happiness and distress, one unbewildered
attains that everlasting refuge.
SANSKRIT

nirmâna-mohâ jita-sanga-dosâ
adhyâtma-nityâ vinivrtta-kâmâh
dvandvair vimuktâh sukha-duhkha-samjnair
gacchanty amûdhâh padam avyayam tat
WORD FOR WORD
nih -- without; mana -- false prestige; mohah -- and illusion; jita -- having conquered; sanga -- of
association; dosah -- the faults; adhyatma -- in spiritual knowledge; nityah -- in eternity; vinivrtta -disassociated; kamah -- from lust; dvandvaih -- from the dualities; vimuktah -- liberated; sukha-duhkha -happiness and distress; samjnaih -- named; gacchanti -- attain; amudhah -- unbewildered; padam -situation; avyayam -- eternal; tat -- that.
TRANSLATION
Those who are free from false prestige, illusion and false association, who understand the eternal, who
are done with material lust, who are freed from the dualities of happiness and distress, and who,
unbewildered, know how to surrender unto the Supreme Person attain to that eternal kingdom.
Text 6
Going to that place which is not lit by the sun or the moon, nor by fire, one never returns; that abode is
the Supreme of Mine.
SANSKRIT

na tad bhâsayate sûryo
na sasânko na pâvakah
yad gatvâ na nivartante
tad dhâma paramam mama
WORD FOR WORD
na -- not; tat -- that; bhasayate -- illuminates; suryah -- the sun; na -- nor; sasankah -- the moon; na -nor; pavakah -- fire, electricity; yat -- where; gatva -- going; na -- never; nivartante -- they come back;
tat dhama -- that abode; paramam -- supreme; mama -- My.
TRANSLATION
That supreme abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by fire or electricity. Those who
reach it never return to this material world.
Text 7
The embodied soul in its own local existence is certainly an eternal part of Me, with the mind as the sixth
of the senses carried in its material position.

Chapter15 - The Yoga of the Supreme Person

…Page 3 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

mamaivâmso jîva-loke
jîva-bhûtah sanâtanah
manah-sasthânîndriyâni
prakriti sthâni karsati

WORD FOR WORD
mama -- My; eva -- certainly; amsah -- fragmental particle; jiva-loke -- in the world of conditional life;
jiva-bhutah -- the conditioned living entity; sanatanah -- eternal; manah -- with the mind; sasthani -- the
six; indriyani -- senses; prakriti -- in material nature; sthani -- situated; karsati -- is struggling hard.
TRANSLATION
The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they
are struggling very hard with the six senses, which include the mind.
Text 8
The body one gets as also is given up
takes its Lord to all these [senses]
along like the fragrance carried by
the air from its source.
SANSKRIT

sarîram yad avâpnoti
yac câpy utkrâmatîsvarah
grhîtvaitâni samyâti
vâyur gandhân ivâsayât
WORD FOR WORD
sariram -- the body; yat -- as;
avapnoti -- gets; yat -- as; ca api -also; utkramati -- gives up; isvarah -the lord of the body; grhitva -taking; etani -- all these; samyati -goes away; vayuh -- the air; gandhan
-- smells; iva -- like; asayat -- from
their source.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in the material world
carries his different conceptions of
life from one body to another as the
air carries aromas. Thus he takes one
kind of body and again quits it to take
another.
Text 9
With the hearing, seeing, touching as
also the tasting and smelling he, from
within the mind enjoys the objects of
the senses.
SANSKRIT

srotram caksuh sparsanam ca
rasanam ghrânam eva ca
adhisthâya manas câyam
visayân upasevate
WORD FOR WORD
srotram -- ears; caksuh -- eyes; sparsanam -- touch; ca -- also; rasanam -- tongue; ghranam -- smelling
power; eva -- also; ca -- and; adhisthaya -- being situated in; manah -- mind; ca -- also; ayam -- he;
visayan -- sense objects; upasevate -- enjoys.
TRANSLATION
The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain type of ear, eye, tongue, nose and
sense of touch, which are grouped about the mind. He thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.
Text 10
Either leaving the body, staying in the body or enjoying the body associated with the modes of nature [are
things ] the ignorant cannot understand, but those who have the spiritual vision can.
Chapter15 - The Yoga of the Supreme Person

…Page 4 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

utkrâmantam sthitam vâpi
bhunjânam vâ gunânvitam
vimûdhâ nânupasyanti
pasyanti jnâna-caksusah
WORD FOR WORD
utkramantam -- quitting the body; sthitam -- situated in the body; va api -- either; bhunjanam -- enjoying;
va -- or; guna-anvitam -- under the spell of the modes of material nature; vimnudhah -- foolish persons; na
-- never; anupasyanti -- can see; pasyanti -- can see; jñâna-caksusah -- those who have the eyes of
knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body, nor can they understand what sort of
body he enjoys under the spell of the modes of nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge can
see all this.
Text 11
Those who endeavor and are of yoga perceive from being of the soul, but those endeavoring who do not
act in favor of the soul do not see this, however developed their minds are.
SANSKRIT

yatanto yoginas cainam
pasyanty âtmany avasthitam
yatanto 'py akrtâtmâno
nainam pasyanty acetasah
WORD FOR WORD
yatantah -- endeavoring; yoginah -- transcendentalists; ca -- also; enam -- this; pasyanti -- can see; atmani
-- in the self; avasthitam -- situated; yatantah -- endeavoring; api -- although; akrta-atmanah -- those
without self-realization; na -- do not; enam -- this; pasyanti -- see; acetasah -- having undeveloped minds.
TRANSLATION
The endeavoring transcendentalists, who are situated in self-realization, can see all this clearly. But those
whose minds are not developed and who are not situated in self-realization cannot see what is taking
place, though they may try to.
Text 12
The splendor that is found in the light of the sun illumining the entire world and is also seen in the moon
and the fire; understand that splendor to be from Me.
SANSKRIT

yad âditya-gatam tejo
jagad bhâsayate 'khilam
yac candramasi yac câgnau
tat tejo viddhi mâmakam
WORD FOR WORD
yat -- that which; aditya-gatam -- in the sunshine; tejah -- splendor; jagat -- the whole world; bhasayate - illuminates; akhilam -- entirely; yat -- that which; candramasi -- in the moon; yat -- that which; ca -also; agnau -- in fire; tat -- that; tejah -- splendor; viddhi -- understand; mamakam -- from Me.
TRANSLATION
The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole world, comes from Me. And the
splendor of the moon and the splendor of fire are also from Me.
Text 13
I permeate the planetary systems and sustain the living beings by My energy and nourish all the plants
together with the soul-given juice.
SANSKRIT

gâm âvisya ca bhûtâni
dhârayâmy aham ojasâ
pusnâmi causadhîh sarvâh
somo bhûtvâ rasâtmakah
WORD FOR WORD
gam -- the planets; avisya -- entering; ca -- also; bhutani -- the living entities; dharayami -- sustain; aham
-- I; ojasa -- by My energy; pusnami -- am nourishing; ca -- and; ausadhih -- vegetables; sarvah -- all;
somah -- the moon; bhutva -- becoming; rasa-atmakah -- supplying the juice.
Chapter15 - The Yoga of the Supreme Person

…Page 5 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become the moon and thereby supply the
juice of life to all vegetables.
Text 14
Enacting as the fire of digestion in the bodies of all living beings, I keep the balance of the ingoing and
outgoing breath and do digest the four kinds of foodstuff [food that one swallows right away, chews, licks
and sucks].
SANSKRIT

aham vaisvânaro bhûtvâ
prâninâm deham âsritah
prânâpâna-samâyuktah
pacâmy annam catur-vidham

WORD FOR WORD
aham -- I; vaisvanarah -- My plenary portion as the digesting fire; bhutva -- becoming; praninam -- of all
living entities; deham -- in the bodies; asritah -- situated; prana -- the outgoing air; apana -- the downgoing air; samayuktah -- keeping in balance; pacami -- I digest; annam -- foodstuff; catuh-vidham -- the
four kinds.
TRANSLATION
I am the fire of digestion in the bodies of all living entities, and I join with the air of life, outgoing and
incoming, to digest the four kinds of foodstuff.
Text 15
Residing in the heart of all beings they have from Me remembrance, knowledge and reasoning; I am
certainly knowable by the Vedas, I am its author and the one who knows its meaning surely too.
SANSKRIT

sarvasya câham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jnânam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedânta-krd veda-vid eva câham

WORD FOR WORD
sarvasya -- of all living beings; ca -- and; aham -- I; hrdi -- in the heart; sannivistah -- situated; mattah -from Me; smrtih -- remembrance; jñânam -- knowledge; apohanam -- forgetfulness; ca -- and; vedaih -- by
the Vedas; ca -- also; sarvaih -- all; aham -- I am; eva -- certainly; vedyah -- knowable; vedanta-krt -- the
compiler of the Vedanta; veda-vit -- the knower of the Vedas; eva -- certainly; ca -- and; aham -- I.
TRANSLATION
I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the
Vedas, I am to be known. Indeed, I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.
Text 16
There are two kinds of being in the world: the perishable and the imperishable state; [of the physical] all
the living beings are perishable while of the oneness to the many it is said that one does not perish.
SANSKRIT

dvâv imau purusau loke
ksaras câksara eva ca
ksarah sarvâni bhûtâni
kûtastho 'ksara ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
dvau -- two; imau -- these; purusau -- living entities; loke -- in the world; ksarah -- fallible; ca -- and;
aksarah -- infallible; eva -- certainly; ca -- and; ksarah -- fallible; sarvani -- all; bhutani -- living entities;
kuta-sthah -- in oneness; aksarah -- infallible;ucyate -- is said.
TRANSLATION
There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In the material world every living entity is
fallible, and in the spiritual world every living entity is called infallible.
Text 17
The supreme person is but the other soul in the beyond of whom is said that pervading the three worlds
He is maintaining [them] as the inexhaustible Lord.
SANSKRIT

uttamah purusas tv anyah
paramâtmety udâhrtah

Chapter15 - The Yoga of the Supreme Person

…Page 6 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

yo loka-trayam âvisya
bibharty avyaya îsvarah
WORD FOR WORD
uttamah -- the best; purusah -- personality; tu -- but; anyah -- another; parama -- the supreme; atma -self; iti -- thus; udahrtah -- is said; yah -- who; loka -- of the universe; trayam -- the three divisions; avisya
-- entering; bibharti -- is maintaining; avyayah --inexhaustible; isvarah -- the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Besides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Supreme Soul, the imperishable Lord
Himself, who has entered the three worlds and is maintaining them.
Text 18
Because I am to the fallible transcendental and beyond the fallible the best, therefore am I in the world
and in the vedic literature celebrated as the Supreme Personality.
SANSKRIT

yasmât ksaram atîto 'ham
aksarâd api cottamah
ato 'mi loke vede ca
prathitah purusottamah
WORD FOR WORD
yasmat -- because; ksaram -- to the fallible; atitah -- transcendental; aham -- I am; aksarat -- beyond the
infallible; api -- also; ca -- and; uttamah -- the best; atah -- therefore; asmi -- I am; loke -- in the world;
vede -- in the Vedic literature; ca -- and; prathitah -- celebrated; purusa-uttamah -- as the Supreme
Personality.
TRANSLATION
Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and because I am the greatest, I
am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person.
Text 19
Anyone who without a doubt knows Me thus as the Supreme Personality - he ,knowing all, renders
devotional service unto Me in all respects, o son of Bharata.
SANSKRIT

yo mâm evam asammûdho
jânâti purusottamam
sa sarva-vid bhajati mâm
sarva-bhâvena bhârata
WORD FOR WORD
yah -- anyone who; mam -- Me; evam -- thus; asammudhah -- without a doubt; janati -- knows; purusauttamam -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sah -- he; sarva-vit -- the knower of everything; bhajati - renders devotional service; mam -- unto Me; sarva-bhavena -- in all respects; bharata -- O son of
Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without doubting, is the knower of everything.
He therefore engages himself in full devotional service to Me, O son of Bharata.
Text 20
Understanding this most confidential part of the revealed scripture thus disclosed by Me, o sinless one,
one becomes intelligent and perfected in ones doing, o son of Bharata.
SANSKRIT

iti guhyatamam sâstram
idam uktam mayânagha
etad buddhvâ buddhimân syât
krta-krtyas ca bhârata

WORD FOR WORD
iti -- thus; guhya-tamam -- the most confidential; sastram -- revealed scripture; idam -- this; uktam -disclosed; maya -- by Me; anagha -- O sinless one; etat -- this; buddhva -- understanding; buddhi-man -intelligent; syat -- one becomes; krta-krtyah -- the most perfect in his endeavors; ca -- and; bharata -- O
son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless one, and it is disclosed now by Me.
Whoever understands this will become wise, and his endeavors will know perfection.
Chapter15 - The Yoga of the Supreme Person

…Page 7 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

Chapter 16

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

The Yoga of discriminating the qualities of
the enlightened and the unenlightened

About the qualities of the divine and the godless
Text 1-3
The Supreme Lord said: 'Fearless, good of heart, persevering in the knowledge of yoga, compassionate, of
restraint, willing to sacrifice, studious, austere and simple; non-violent, truthful, free from anger,
renounced, peaceful, unmalicious, merciful to all, without greed, gentle, modest and determined;
arduous, forgiving,steadfast, clean, without envy and not striving for honor, are the qualities of one who
is born of the divine.
SANSKRIT

srî-bhagavân uvâca
abhayam sattva-samsuddhir
jnâna-yoga-vyavasthitih
dânam damas ca yajnas ca
svâdhyâyas tapa ârjavam
ahimsâ satyam akrodhas
tyâgah sântir apaisunam
dayâ bhûtesv aloluptvam
mârdavam hrîr acâpalam
tejah ksamâ dhrtih saucam
adroho nâtimânitâ
bhavanti sampadam daivîm
abhijâtasya bhârata
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; abhayam -- fearlessness; sattvasamsuddhih -- purification of one's existence;jñâna -- in knowledge; yoga -- of linking up; vyavasthitih -the situation; danam -- charity; damah -- controlling the mind; ca -- and; yajnah -- performance of
sacrifice; ca -- and; svadhyayah -- study of Vedic literature; tapah -- austerity; ariavam -- simplicity,
ahimsa -- nonviolence; satyam -- truthfulness; akrodhah -- freedom from anger; tyagah -- renunciation;
santih -- tranquillity; apaisunam -- aversion to fault-finding; daya -- mercy; bhutesu -- towards all living
entities; aloluptvam -- freedom from greed; mardavam -- gentleness; hrih -- modesty; acapalam -determination;
teiah -- vigor; ksama -- forgiveness; dhrtih -- fortitude; saucam -- cleanliness; adrohah --freedom from
envy; na -- not; ati manita -- expectation of honor; bhavanti -- are; sampadam -- the qualities; daivim -the transcendental nature; abhijatasya -- of one who is born of; bharata -- O son of Bharata.
Chapter16 - The Yoga of discriminating the qualities

…Page 1 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Fearlessness; purification of one's existence; cultivation of
spiritual knowledge; charity; self-control; performance of sacrifice; study of the Vedas; austerity;
simplicity; nonviolence; truthfulness; freedom from anger; renunciation; tranquillity; aversion to
faultfinding; compassion for all living entities; freedom from covetousness; gentleness; modesty; steady
determination; vigor; forgiveness; fortitude; cleanliness; and freedom from envy and from the passion for
honor -- these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with divine
nature.
Text 4
Deceit, pride, conceit and anger and surely violence and ignorance are the qualities that are the
consequence of the unenlightened, o son of Prithâ.
SANSKRIT

dambho darpo 'bhimânas ca
krodhah pârusyam eva ca
ajnânam câbhijâtasya
pârtha sampadam âsurîm

WORD FOR WORD
dambhah -- pride; darpah -- arrogance; abhimanah -- conceit; ca -- and; krodhah -- anger; parusyam -harshness; eva -- certainly; ca -- and; ajñânam -- ignorance; ca -- and; abhijatasya -- of one who is born
of; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; sampadam -- the qualities; asurim -- the demoniac nature.
TRANSLATION
Pride, arrogance, conceit, anger, harshness and ignorance -- these qualities belong to those of demoniac
nature, O son of Prithâ.
Text 5
The divine characteristics are of
liberation while the qualities of the
godless result from bondage. Do not
worry, son of Pându, as your life is
the consequence of transcendental
wealth.
SANSKRIT

daivî sampad vimoksâya
nibandhâyâsurî matâ
mâ sucah sampadam daivîm
abhijâto 'si pândava

WORD FOR WORD
daivi -- transcendental; sampat -assets; vimoksaya -- meant for
liberation; nibandhaya -- for bondage;
asuri -- demoniac qualities; mata -are considered; ma -- do not; sucah -worry; sampadam -- assets; daivim -transcendental; abhijatah -- born of;
asi -- you are; pandava -- O son of
Pandu.
TRANSLATION
The transcendental qualities are
conducive to liberation, whereas the
demoniac qualities make for bondage.
Do not worry, O son of Pandu, for you
are born with the divine qualities.
Text 6
There are two types of conditioned
beings in this world: the godly and
indeed the unenlightened. About the
divine I spoke at length; just hear
about the godless from me.
Chapter16 - The Yoga of discriminating the qualities

…Page 2 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

dvau bhûta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva âsura eva ca
daivo vistarasah prokta
âsuram pârtha me srnu
WORD FOR WORD
dvau -- two; bhuta-sargau -- created living beings; loke -- in the world; asmin -- this; daivah -- godly;
asurah -- demoniac; eva -- certainly; ca -- and; daivah -- the divine; vistarasah -- at great length; proktah
-- said; asuram -- the demoniac; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; me -- from Me; srnu -- just hear.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is called the divine and the other
demoniac. I have alread explained to you at length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the
demoniac.
Text 7
The disorderly ones do not know how to begin or where to stop, they are unclean, do not know to behave
and have no truth in them.
SANSKRIT

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
janâ na vidur âsurâh
na saucam nâpi câcâro
na satyam tesu vidyate
WORD FOR WORD
pravrttim -- acting properly; ca -- also; nivrttim -- not acting improperly; ca -- and; janah -- persons; na -never; viduh -- know; asurah -- of demoniac quality; na -- never; saucam -- cleanliness; na -- nor; api -also; ca -- and; acarah -- behavior; na -- never; satyam -- truth; tesu -- in them; vidyate -- there is.
TRANSLATION
Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to be done. Neither cleanliness
nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.
Text 8
They say that the universe does not really have a purpose, that it has no ruler, did not come into
existence from a certain cause and that there is no other cause than that of lust.
SANSKRIT

asatyam apratistham te
jagad âhur anîsvaram
aparaspara-sambhûtam
kim anyat kâma-haitukam

WORD FOR WORD
asatyam -- unreal; apratistham -- without foundation; te -- they; jagat -- the cosmic manifestation; ahuh - say; anisvaram -- with no controller; aparaspara -- without cause; sambhutam -- arisen; kim anyat -there is no other cause; kama-haitukam -- it is due to lust only.
TRANSLATION
They say that this world is unreal, with no foundation, no God in control. They say it is produced of sex
desire and has no cause other than lust.
Text 9
Less intelligent, having lost oneself being complacent with this outlook do the less favorable activities
flourish and does ones work lead to the unfortunate of destroying the planet.
SANSKRIT

etâm drstim avastabhya
nastâtmâno 'lpa-buddhayah
prabhavanty ugra-karmânah
ksayâya jagato 'hitâh
WORD FOR WORD
etam -- this; drstim -- vision; avastabhya -- accepting; nasta -- having lost; atmanah -- themselves; alpabuddhayah -- the less intelligent; prabhavanti -- flourish; ugra-karmanah -- engaged in painful activities;
ksayaya -- for destruction; jagatah -- of the world; ahitah -- unbeneficial.
Chapter16 - The Yoga of discriminating the qualities

…Page 3 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and who have no intelligence,
engage in unbeneficial, horrible works, meant to destroy the world.
Text 10
Confiding in lusts that are insatiable, in hypocrisy, arrogance and driven by false pride, one, led by
illusion, takes to the non-permanent of material things and thrives in dedication to the impure.
SANSKRIT

kâmam âsritya duspûram
dambha-mâna-madânvitâh
mohâd grhîtvâsad-grâhân
pravartante 'suci-vratâh

WORD FOR WORD
kamam -- lust; asritya -- taking shelter of; duspuram -- insatiable; dambha -- of pride; mana -- and false
prestige; mada-anvitah -- absorbed in the conceit; mohat -- by illusion; grhitva -- taking; asat -nonpermanent; grahan -- things; pravartante -- they flourish; asuci -- to the unclean; vratah -- avowed.
TRANSLATION
Taking shelter of insatiable lust and absorbed in the conceit of pride and false prestige, the demoniac,
thus illusioned are always sworn to unclean work, attracted by the impermanent
Text 11-12
Their fears and anxieties are endless and to the point of death they trust in sense-gratification as the
supreme goal of life. Thus in this way they ascertain themselves of being bound to the lust and anger,
entangled in a network of expectations and of that mentality they, for the enjoyment of their senses,
desire to accumulate wealth by unfair means.
SANSKRIT

cintâm aparimeyâm ca
pralayântâm upâsritâh
kâmopabhoga-paramâ
etâvad iti niscitâh
âsâ-pâsa-satair baddhâh
kâma-krodha-parâyanâh
îhante kâma-bhogârtham
anyâyenârtha-sancayân
WORD FOR WORD
cintam -- fears and anxieties; aparimeyam -- immeasurable; ca -- and; pralaya-antam -- unto the point of
death; upasritah -- having taken shelter of; kama-upabhoga -- sense gratification; paramah -- the highest
goal of life; etavat -- thus; iti -- in this way; niscitah -- having ascertained;
asa-pasa -- entanglements in a network of hope; sataih -- by hundreds; baddhah -- being bound; kama -- of
lust; krodha -- and anger; parayanah -- always situated in the mentality; ihante -- they desire; kama -lust; bhoga -- sense enjoyment; artham -- for the purpose of; anyayena -- illegally; artha -- of wealth;
sancayan -- accumulation.
TRANSLATION
They believe that to gratify the senses is the prime necessity of human civilization. Thus until the end of
life their anxiety is immeasurable. Bound by a network of hundreds of thousands of desires and absorbed
in lust and anger, they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.
Text 13-15
'Today I have won this and that I shall get; this is what Ì want, that is mine and tomorrow I will even have
more of it. That enemy I beated today and those I shall destroy too. For sure I am the Lord. I am the
enjoyer, the perfection and I am the happy one to be in power. I am the wealthy one of noble company, I
am the one and only, who would there be else but me; I shall sacrifice and give in charity, I am the one to
be happy'; this is how they are deluded by their ignorance.
SANSKRIT

idam adya mayâ labdham
imam prâpsye manoratham
idam astîdam api me
bhavisyati punar dhanam
Chapter16 - The Yoga of discriminating the qualities

…Page 4 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

asau mayâ hatah satrur
hanisye câparân api
îsvaro 'ham aham bhogî
siddho 'ham balavân sukhî
âdhyo 'bhijanavân asmi
ko 'nyo 'ti sadrso mayâ
yaksye dâsyâmi modisya
ity ajnâna-vimohitâh
WORD FOR WORD
idam -- this; adya -- today; maya -- by me; labdham -- gained; imam -- this; prapsye -- I shall gain; manahratham -- according to my desires; idam -- this; asti -- there is; idam -- this; api -- also; me -- mine;
bhavisyati -- it will increase in the future; punah -- again; dhanam -- wealth;
asau -- that; maya -- by me; hatah -- has been killed; satruh -- enemy; hanisye -- I shall kill; ca -- also;
aparan -- others; api -- certainly; isvarah -- the lord; aham -- I am; aham -- I am; bhogi -- the enjoyer;
siddhah -- perfect; aham -- I am; bala-van -- powerful; sukhi -- happy;
adhyah -- wealthy; abhijana-van -- surrounded by aristocratic relatives; asmi -- I am; kah -- who; anyah -other; asti -- there is; sadrsah -- like; maya -- me; yaksye -- I shall sacrifice; dasyami -- I shall give charity;
modisye -- I shall rejoice; iti -- thus; ajñâna -- by ignorance; vimohitah -- deluded.
TRANSLATION
The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and I will gain more according to my
schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I
have killed him, and my other enemies will also be killed. I am the lord of everything. I am the enjoyer. I
am perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by aristocratic relatives. There is none
so powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall
rejoice." In this way, such persons are deluded by ignorance.
Text 16
Thus perplexed by countless worries they are caught in a pool of illusions and addicted to senseual
pleasure they slide down into a hell of disarray.
SANSKRIT

aneka-citta-vibhrântâ
moha-jâla-samâvrtâh
prasaktâh kâma-bhogesu
patanti narake 'sucau

WORD FOR WORD
aneka -- numerous; citta -- by anxieties; vibhrantah -- perplexed; moha -- of illusions; jala -- by a
network; samavrtah -- surrounded; prasaktah -- attached; kama-bhogesu -- to sense gratification; patanti - they glide down; narake -- into hell; asucau -- unclean.
TRANSLATION
Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions, they become too strongly
attached to sense enjoyment and fall down into hell.
Text 17
Blasé, shameless about their wealth and imagined they in the full of their delusion engage in so-called
sacrifices which they perform out of pride with no regard for rules and regulations.
SANSKRIT

âtma-sambhâvitâh stabdhâ
dhana-mâna-madânvitâh
yajante nâma-yajnais te
dambhenâvidhi-pûrvakam
WORD FOR WORD
atma-sambhavitah -- self-complacent; stabdhah -- impudent; dhana-mana -- of wealth and false prestige;
mada -- in the delusion; anvitah -- absorbed; yajante -- they perform sacrifice; nama -- in name only;
yajnaih -- with sacrifices; te -- they; dambhena -- out of pride; avidhi-purvakam -- without following any
rules and regulations.
TRANSLATION
Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige, they sometimes proudly
perform sacrifices in name only, without following any rules or regulations.
Chapter16 - The Yoga of discriminating the qualities

…Page 5 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 18
Materially identified in their pride, strength, lust and anger they enviously fell into mocking Me being
situated in themselves and in others.
SANSKRIT

ahankâram balam darpam
kâmam krodham ca samsritâh
mâm âtma-para-dehesu
pradvisanto 'bhyasûyakâh

WORD FOR WORD
ahankaram -- false ego; balam -- strength; darpam -- pride; kamam -- lust; krodham -- anger; ca -- also;
samsritah -- having taken shelter of; mam -- Me; atma -- in their own; para -- and in other; dehesu -bodies; pradvisantah -- blaspheming; abhyasuyakah -- envious.
TRANSLATION
Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demons become envious of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is situated in their own bodies and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme
against the real religion.
Text 19
Those who are envious and mischievous with Me I always cast into the ocean of matter as the lowest of
mankind who for sure inauspiciously are born from the wombs of the degenerates.
SANSKRIT

tân aham dvisatah krûrân
samsâresu narâdhamân
ksipâmy ajashram asubhân
âsurîsv eva yonisu
WORD FOR WORD
tan -- those; aham -- I; dvisatah -- envious; kruran -- mischievous; samsaresu -- into the ocean of material
existence; nara-adhaman -- the lowest of mankind; ksipami -- I put; ajashram -- forever; asubhan -inauspicious; asurisu -- demoniac; eva -- certainly; yonisu -- into the wombs.
TRANSLATION
Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, I perpetually cast into the ocean
of material existence, into various demoniac species of life.
Text 20
Life after life the foolish, thus attaining to births from the godless, for sure will have to do without Me, o
son of Kuntî, as they head for the worst destinations
SANSKRIT

âsurîm yonim âpannâ
mûdhâ janmani janmani
mâm aprâpyaiva kaunteya
tato yânty adhamâm gatim
WORD FOR WORD
asurim -- demoniac; yonim -- species; apannah -- gaining; mudhah -- the foolish; janmani janmani -- in
birth after birth; mam -- Me; aprapya -- without achieving; eva -- certainly; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî;
tatah -- thereafter; yanti -- go; adhamam -- condemned; gatim -- destination.
TRANSLATION
Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, O son of Kuntî, such persons can never
approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type of existence.
Text 21
In this selfdestruction there are three gates of hell: lust, anger and greed. Therefore one must give up
these three.
SANSKRIT

tri-vidham narakasyedam
dvâram nâsanam âtmanah
kâmah krodhas tathâ lobhas
tasmâd etat trayam tyajet
WORD FOR WORD
tri-vidham -- of three kinds; narakasya -- of hell; idam -- this; dvaram -- gate; nasanam -- destructive;
atmanah -- of the self; kamah -- lust; krodhah -- anger; tatha -- as well as; lobhah -- greed; tasmat -therefore; etat -- these; trayam -- three; tyajet -- one must give up.
Chapter16 - The Yoga of discriminating the qualities

…Page 6 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
There are three gates leading to this hell -- lust, anger and greed. Every sane man should give these up,
for they lead to the degradation of the soul.
Text 22
Liberated from these three gates of ignorance, o son of Kuntî, is a person in respect with the soul and
blessed with that does he go for the supreme destination.
SANSKRIT

etair vimuktah kaunteya
tamo-dvârais tribhir narah
âcaraty âtmanah sreyas
tato yâti parâm gatim
WORD FOR WORD
etaih -- from these; vimuktah -- being liberated; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; tamah-dvaraih -- from the
gates of ignorance; tribhih -- of three kinds; narah -- a person; acarati -- performs; atmanah -- for the
self; sreyah -- benediction; tatah -- thereafter; yati -- he goes; param -- to the supreme; gatim -destination.
TRANSLATION
The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kuntî, performs acts conducive to selfrealization and thus gradually attains the supreme destination.
Text 23
The one who gives up on the regulations of the scriptures will be acting according his own whims and
never attain perfection, happiness or the goal of the transcendent.
SANSKRIT

yah sâstra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kâma-kâratah
na sa siddhim avâpnoti
na sukham na parâm gatim

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- anyone who; sastra-vidhim -- the regulations of the scriptures; utsrjya -- giving up; vartate -remains; kama-karatah -- acting whimsically in lust; na -- never; sah -- he; siddhim -- perfection; avapnoti
-- achieves; na -- never; sukham -- happiness; na -- never; param -- the supreme; gatim -- perfectional
stage.
TRANSLATION
He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims attains neither perfection, nor
happiness, nor the supreme destination.
Text 24
Therefore is it the scriptural authority that determines what should and should not be done. Knowing the
regulations declared by the scripture, you should do your duty here.
SANSKRIT

tasmâc châstram pramânam te
kâryâkârya-vyavasthitau
jnâtvâ sâstra-vidhânoktam
karma kartum ihârhasi

WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; sastram -- the scriptures; pramanam -- evidence; te -- your; karya -- duty; akarya -and forbidden activities; vyavasthitau -- in determining; jnatva -- knowing; sastra -- of scripture; vidhana - the regulations; uktam -- as declared; karma -- work; kartum -- do; iha -- in this world; arhasi -- you
should.
TRANSLATION
One should therefore understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulations of the scriptures.
Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so that he may gradually be elevated.

Chapter16 - The Yoga of discriminating the qualities

…Page 7 of 7

The Bhagavad Gita

Chapter 17

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

The Yoga of the Threefold Division of Faith

About the nature of each type of food intake, austerity and sacrifice.
Text 1
Arjuna said: 'Those who give up on the regulations of the scriptures, but do worship having full faith - is
their faith, o Krishna, in goodness, passion or in ignorance?'
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
ye sâstra-vidhim utsrjya
yajante sraddhayânvitâh
tesâm nisthâ tu kâ krsna
sattvam âho rajas tamah
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; ye -- those who; sastra-vidhim -- the regulations of scripture; utsrjya -giving up; yajante -- worship; sraddhaya -- full faith; anvitah -- possessed of; tesam -- of them; nistha -the faith; tu -- but; ka -- what; krsna -- O Krishna; sattvam -- in goodness; aho -- or else; rajah -- in
passion; tamah -- in ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna inquired: O Krishna, what is the situation of those who do not follow the principles of scripture but
worship according to their own imagination? Are they in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?
Text 2
The Supreme Lord said: 'The faith of the embodied souls takes three forms according each his love and
experience: to goodness, to passion and to ignorance; so thus hear about this from Me.
SANSKRIT

tâmasî ceti tâm srnu

srî-bhagavân uvâca
tri-vidhâ bhavati sraddhâ
dehinâm sâ svabhâva-jâ
sâttvikî râjasî caiva

WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidha -- of three kinds; bhavati -becomes; sraddha -- the faith; dehinam -- of the embodied; sa -- that; sva-bhava-ja -- according to his
mode of material nature; sattviki -- in the mode of goodness; rajasi -- in the mode of passion; ca -- also;
eva -- certainly; tamasi -- in the mode of ignorance; ca -- and; iti -- thus; tam -- that; srnu -- hear from
Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: According to the modes of nature acquired by the embodied
soul, one's faith can be of three kinds -- in goodness, in passion or in ignorance. Now hear about this.
Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 1 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 3
Faith evolves according to everyone's nature, o son of Bharata; the person ìs the full of this faith and is,
with such a faith endowed, thus certain of himself.
SANSKRIT

sattvânurûpâ sarvasya
sraddhâ bhavati bhârata
sraddhâmayo 'yam puruso
yo yac-chraddhah sa eva sah

WORD FOR WORD
sattva-anurupa -- according to the existence; sarvasya -- of everyone; sraddha -- faith; bhavati -becomes; bharata -- O son of Bharata; sraddha -- faith; mayah -- full of; ayam -- this; purusah -- living
entity; yah -- who; yat -- having which; sraddhah -- faith; sah -thus; eva -- certainly; sah -- he.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bharata, according to one's existence under the various modes of nature, one evolves a particular
kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a particular faith according to the modes he has acquired.
Text 4
Those of goodness are in respect with the godly, in the mode of passion one deals with the demoniac,
while people in ignorance are in respect with the spirits of the dead and with ghosts.
SANSKRIT

yajante sâttvikâ devân
yaksa-raksâmsi râjasâh
pretân bhûta-ganâms cânye
yajante tâmasâ janâh

WORD FOR WORD
yajante -- worship; sattvikah -- those who are in the mode of goodness; devan -- demigods; yaksa-raksamsi
-- demons; rajasah -- those who are in the mode of passion; pretan -- spirits of the dead; bhuta-ganan -ghosts; ca -- and; anye -- others; yajante -- worship; tamasah -- in the mode of ignorance; janah -people.
TRANSLATION
Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of passion worship the demons;
and those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts and spirits.
Text 5-6
Those persons who undergo severe austerities not prescribed in the scriptures and who proudly identified
with the body are engaged in tormenting the organs of their bodies in a desire of and attachment to their
own prowess, are mistaken about Me; consider those who persistently deal that way with themselves as
being of an obscure resolve.
SANSKRIT

asâstra-vihitam ghoram
tapyante ye tapo janâh
dambhâhankâra-samyuktâh
kâma-râga-balânvitâh

karsayantah sarîra-stham
bhûta-grâmam acetasah
mâm caivântah sarîra-stham
tân viddhy âsura-niscayân
WORD FOR WORD
asastra -- not in the scriptures; vihitam -- directed; ghoram -- harmful to others; tapyante -- undergo; ye - those who; tapah -- austerities; janah -- persons; dambha -- with pride; ahankara -- and egoism;
samyuktah -- engaged; kama -- of lust; raga -- and attachment; bala -- by the force; anvitah -- impelled;
karsayantah -- tormenting; sarira-stham -- situated within the body; bhuta-gramam -- the combination of
material elements; acetasah -- having a misled mentality; mam -- Me; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; antah -within; sarira-stham -- situated in the body; tan -- them; viddhi -- understand; asura-niscayan -- demons.
TRANSLATION
Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in the scriptures, performing them
out of pride and egoism, who are impelled by lust and attachment, who are foolish and who torture the
material elements of the body as well as the Supersoul dwelling within, are to be known as demons.
Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 2 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 7
Also the food intake ones cherishes is assuredly of three kinds; just like with sacrifice, austerity and
charity; hear now about how they differ from one another.
SANSKRIT

âhâras tv api sarvasya
tri-vidho bhavati priyah
yajnas tapas tathâ dânam
tesâm bhedam imam srnu

WORD FOR WORD
aharah -- eating; tu -- certainly; api -- also; sarvasya -- of everyone; tri-vidhah -- of three kinds; bhavati -there is; priyah -- dear; yajnah -- sacrifice; tapah -- austerity; tatha -- also; danam -- charity; tesam -- of
them; bhedam -- the differences; imam -- this; srnu -- hear.
TRANSLATION
Even the food each person prefers is of three kinds, according to the three modes of material nature. The
same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity. Now hear of the distinctions between them.
Text 8
Food preferred by the ones in goodness increases the duration of life, purifies ones being, gives strength,
health, happiness and satisfaction and is juicy, rich, wholesome and a pleasure to the heart.
SANSKRIT

âyuh-sattva-balârogyasukha-prîti vivardhanâh
rasyâh snigdhâh sthirâ hrdyâ
âhârâh sâttvika-priyâh

WORD FOR WORD
ayuh -- duration of life; sattva -- existence; bala -- strength; arogya -- health; sukha -- happiness; priti -and satisfaction; vivardhanah -- increasing; rasyah -- juicy; snigdhah -- fatty; sthirah -- enduring; hrdyah -pleasing to the heart; aharah -- food; sattvika -- to one in goodness; priyah -- palatable.
TRANSLATION
Foods dear to those in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify one's existence and give
strength, health, happiness and satisfaction. Such foods are juicy, fatty, wholesome, and pleasing to the
heart.Text 9
Bitter, sour, salty, very hot, smelly, dried out and burnt is the food of those in the mode of passion; it
makes unhappy, miserable and causes disease.
SANSKRIT

katv-amla-lavanâty-usnatîksna-rûksa-vidâhinah
âhârâ râjasasyestâ
duhkha-sokâmaya-pradâh

WORD FOR WORD
katu -- bitter; amla -- sour; lavana -- salty; ati usna -- very hot; tiksna -- pungent; ruksa -- dry; vidahinah - burning; aharah -- food; rajasasya -- to one in the mode of passion; istah -- palatable; duhkha -- distress;
soka -- misery; amaya -- disease; pradah -- causing.
TRANSLATION
Foods that are too bitter, too sour, salty, hot, pungent, dry and burning are dear to those in the mode of
passion. Such foods cause distress, misery and disease.
Text 10
That which is spoiled, lacks taste, smells bad, is decomposed, a left over from a previous meal and has
impurities in it, is food dear to the ignorant.
SANSKRIT

yâta-yâmam gata-rasam
pûti paryusitam ca yat
ucchistam api câmedhyam
bhojanam tâmasa-priyam

WORD FOR WORD
yata-yamam -- food cooked three hours before being eaten; gata-rasam -- tasteless; puti -- bad-smelling;
paryusitam -- decomposed; ca -- also; yat -- that which; ucchistam -- remnants of food eaten by others;
Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 3 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
api -- also; ca -- and; amedhyam -- untouchable; bhojanam -- eating; tamasa -- to one in the mode of
darkness; priyam -- dear.
TRANSLATION
Food prepared more than three hours before being eaten, food that is tasteless, decomposed and putrid,
and food consisting of remnants and untouchable things is dear to those in the mode of darkness.
Text 11
Sacrifice that is performed according the scripture by those who are free from profit motives and is thus
surely of an absorbed mind is of goodness.
SANSKRIT

aphalâkânksibhir yajno
vidhi-disto ya ijyate
yastavyam eveti manah
samâdhâya sa sâttvikah

WORD FOR WORD
aphala-akanksibhih -- by those devoid of desire for result; yajnah -- sacrifice; vidhi-distah -- according to
the direction of scripture; yah -- which; ijyate -- is performed; yastavyam -- must be performed; eva -certainly; iti -- thus; manah -- mind; samadhaya -- fixing; sah -- it; sattvikah -- in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
Of sacrifices, the sacrifice performed according to the directions of scripture, as a matter of duty, by
those who desire no reward, is of the nature of goodness.
Text 12
But that what is done in desire for the result and out of pride, o chief of the Bhâratas, know that sacrifice
as being of the mode of passion.
SANSKRIT

abhisandhâya tu phalam
dambhârtham api caiva yat
ijyate bharata-srestha
tam yajnam viddhi râjasam
WORD FOR WORD
abhisandhaya -- desiring; tu -- but; phalam -- the result; dambha -- pride; artham -- for the sake of; api -also; ca -- and; eva -- certainly; yat -- that which; ijyate -- is performed; bharata-srestha -- O chief of the
Bhâratas; tam -- that; yajnam -- sacrifice; viddhi -- know; rajasam -- in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATION
But the sacrifice performed for some material benefit, or for the sake of pride, O chief of the Bhâratas,
you should know to be in the mode of passion.
Text 13
Devoid of the principles [of satya, dayâ, tapas, sauca; truth, compassion, austerity and cleanliness], with
no offerings of food, in disrespect of mantras, without gifts and with lacking faith is sacrifice to be
considered as of ignorance.
SANSKRIT

vidhi-hînam asrstânnam
mantra-hînam adaksinam
sraddhâ-virahitam yajnam
tâmasam paricaksate
WORD FOR WORD
vidhi-hinam -- without scriptural direction; asrsta-annam -- without distribution of prasadam; mantrahinam -- with no chanting of the Vedic hymns; adaksinam -- with no remunerations to the priests; sraddha
-- faith; virahitam -- without; yajnam -- sacrifice; tamasam -- in the mode of ignorance; paricaksate -- is
to be considered.
TRANSLATION
Any sacrifice performed without regard for the directions of scripture, without distribution of prasadam
[spiritual food], without chanting of Vedic hymns and remunerations to the priests, and without faith is
considered to be in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 4 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 14
In deeds is austerity said to be of respect for the divinity, the twice-born, the spiritual teacher and the
wise in cleanliness, sincerity, celibacy and nonviolence.
SANSKRIT

deva-dvija-guru-prâjnapûjanam saucam ârjavam
brahmacaryam ahimsâ ca
sarîram tapa ucyate

WORD FOR WORD
deva -- of the Supreme Lord; dvija -- the brahmanas; guru -- the spiritual master; prajna -- and
worshipable personalities; pujanam -- worship; saucam -- cleanliness; arjavam -- simplicity;
brahmacaryam -- celibacy; ahimsa -- nonviolence; ca -- also; sariram -- pertaining to the body; tapah -austerity; ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
Austerity of the body consists in worship of the Supreme Lord, the brahmanas, the spiritual master, and
superiors like the father and mother, and in cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence.
Text 15
To the voice is austerity for sure said to be of truthful, pleasing and beneficial, inoffensive words that are
of vedic study and practice.
SANSKRIT

anudvega-karam vâkyam
satyam priya-hitam ca yat
svâdhyâyâbhyasanam caiva
vânmayam tapa ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
anudvega-karam -- not agitating; vakyam -- words; satyam -- truthful; priya -- dear; hitam -- beneficial; ca
-- also; yat -- which; svadhyaya -- of Vedic study; abhyasanam -- practice; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; vakmayam -- of the voice; tapah -- austerity; ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
Austerity of speech consists in speaking words that are truthful, pleasing, beneficial, and not agitating to
others, and also in regularly reciting Vedic literature.
Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 5 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 16
To ones thinking is this austerity then said to be of a considerate mind of good faith, gravity, selfcontrol
and selfcorrection.
SANSKRIT

manah-prasâdah saumyatvam
maunam âtma-vinigrahah
bhâva-samsuddhir ity etat
tapo mânasam ucyate

WORD FOR WORD
manah-prasadah -- satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam -- being without duplicity towards others;
maunam -- gravity; atma -- of the self; vinigrahah -- control; bhava -- of one's nature; samsuddhih -purification; iti -- thus; etat -- this; tapah -- austerity; manasam -- of the mind; ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purification of one's existence are the austerities of
the mind.
Text 17
That threefold austerity [of deeds, the voice and the mind] executed by men with faith in the
transcendental without longing for the fruit is said to be of goodness.
SANSKRIT

sraddhayâ parayâ taptam
tapas tat tri-vidham naraih
aphalâkânksibhir yuktaih
sâttvikam paricaksate

WORD FOR WORD
sraddhaya -- with faith; paraya -- transcendental; taptam -- executed; tapah -- austerity; tat -- that; trividham -- of three kinds; naraih -- by men; aphala-akanksibhih -- who are without desires for fruits;
yuktaih -- engaged; sattvikam -- in the mode of goodness; paricaksate -- is called.
TRANSLATION
This threefold austerity, performed with transcendental faith by men not expecting material benefits but
engaged only for the sake of the Supreme, is called austerity in goodness.
Text 18
Austerity performed in this world for the sake of respect, honor, veneration and indeed pride is said to be
of passion; it is unstable and temporary.
SANSKRIT

satkâra-mâna-pûjârtham
tapo dambhena caiva yat
kriyate tad iha proktam
râjasam calam adhruvam
WORD FOR WORD
sat-kara -- respect; mana -- honor; puja -- and worship; artham -- for the sake of; tapah -- austerity;
dambhena -- with pride; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; yat -- which; kriyate -- is performed; tat -- that; iha -in this world; proktam -- is said; rajasam -- in the mode of passion; calam -- flickering; adhruvam -temporary.
TRANSLATION
Penance performed out of pride and for the sake of gaining respect, honor and worship is said to be in the
mode of passion. It is neither stable nor permanent.
Text 19
Austerity foolishly performed with the intent to torture oneself or with the purpose of destroying others is
said to be in the mode of darkness.
SANSKRIT

mûdha-grâhenâtmano yat
pîdayâ kriyate tapah
parasyotsâdanârtham vâ
tat tâmasam udâhrtam

WORD FOR WORD
mudha -- foolish; grahena -- with endeavor; atmanah -- of one's own self; yat -- which; pidaya -- by
torture; kriyate -- is performed; tapah -- penance; parasya -- to others; utsadana-artham -- for the sake of
causing annihilation; va -- or; tat -- that; tamasam -- in the mode of darkness; udahrtam -- is said to be.
Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 6 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
Penance performed out of foolishness, with self-torture or to destroy or injure others, is said to be in the
mode of ignorance.
Text 20
Donations given dutifully, irrespective the return, at the proper time and place and to suitable persons that giving is considered to be of goodness.
SANSKRIT

dâtavyam iti yad dânam
dîyate 'nupakârine
dese kâle ca pâtre ca
tad dânam sâttvikam smrtam
WORD FOR WORD
datavyam -- worth giving; iti -- thus; yat -- that which; danam -- charity; diyate -- is given; anupakarine -irrespective of return; dese -- in a proper place; kale -- at a proper time; ca -- also; patre -- to a suitable
person; ca -- and; tat -- that; danam -- charity; sattvikam -- in the mode of goodness; smrtam -- is
considered.
TRANSLATION
Charity given out of duty, without expectation of return, at the proper time and place, and to a worthy
person is considered to be in the mode of goodness.
Text 21
But that which again is given desiring a return of some result or with resentment; that giving is understood
to be of the mode of passion.
SANSKRIT

yat tu pratyupakârârtham
phalam uddisya vâ punah
dîyate ca pariklistam
tad dânam râjasam smrtam

WORD FOR WORD
yat -- that which; tu -- but; prati-upakara-artham -- for the sake of getting some return; phalam -- a
result; uddisya -- desiring; va -- or; punah -- again; diyate -- is given; ca -- also; pariklistam -- grudgingly;
tat -- that; danam -- charity; rajasam -- in the mode of passion; smrtam -- is understood to be.
TRANSLATION
But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire for fruitive results, or in a
grudging mood, is said to be charity in the mode of passion.
Text 22
That charity which is given at the wrong place, the wrong time and to unworthy persons and as well is
given without respect and proper attention - that is said to be in the mode of ignorance.
SANSKRIT

adesa-kâle yad dânam
apâtrebhyas ca dîyate
asat-krtam avajnâtamtat tâmasam udâhrtam
WORD FOR WORD
adesa -- at an unpurified place; kale -- and unpurified time; yat -- that which; danam -- charity;
apatrebhyah -- to unworthy persons; ca -- also; diyate -- is given; asat-krtam -- without respect;
avajnatam -- without proper attention; tat -- that; tamasam -- in the mode of darkness; udahrtam -- is
said to be.
TRANSLATION
And charity performed at an impure place, at an improper time, to unworthy persons, or without proper
attention and respect is said to be in the mode of ignorance.
Text 23
With Om Tat Sat is to that the threefold of the spiritual indicated which the brahmins till now used for as
well sacrifices as the vedic literature.
SANSKRIT

om tat sad iti nirdeso
brahmanas tri-vidhah smrtah
brâhmanâs tena vedâs ca
yajnâs ca vihitâh purâ
Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 7 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
om -- indication of the Supreme; tat -- that; sat -- eternal; iti -- thus; nirdesah -- indication; brahmanah -of the Supreme; tri-vidhah -- threefold; smrtah -- is considered; brahmanah -- the brahmanas; tena -- with
that; vedah -- the Vedic literature; ca -- also; yajnah -- sacrifice; ca -- also; vihitah -- used; pura -formerly.
TRANSLATION
From the beginning of creation, the three words om tat sat were used to indicate the Supreme Absolute
Truth. These three symbolic representations were used by brahmanas while chanting the hymns of the
Vedas and during sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Supreme.
Text 24
Therewith does Om indicate the beginning of the sacrifices of the transcendentalists of charity and
penance according the scriptural regulations.
SANSKRIT

tasmâd om ity udâhrtya
yajna-dâna-tapah-kriyâh
pravartante vidhânoktâh
satatam brahma-vâdinâm
WORD FOR WORD
tasmat -- therefore; om -- beginning with om; iti -- thus; udahrtya -- indicating; yajna -- of sacrifice; dana
-- charity; tapah -- and penance; kriyah -- performances; pravartante -- begin; vidhana-uktah -- according
to scriptural regulation; satatam -- always; brahma-vadinam -- of the transcendentalists.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, transcendentalists undertaking performances of sacrifice, charity and penance in accordance
with scriptural regulations begin always with om, to attain the Supreme.
Text 25
Next is Tat, to the ones desiring liberation, used when one is not after the results of sacrifice with the
various activities of charity and penance
SANSKRIT

tad ity anabhisandhâya
phalam yajna-tapah-kriyâh
dâna-kriyâs ca vividhâh
kriyante moksa-kânksibhih

WORD FOR WORD
tat -- that; iti -- thus; anabhisandhaya -- without desiring; phalam -- the fruitive result; yajna -- of
sacrifice; tapah -- and penance; kriyah -- activities; dana -- of charity; kriyah -- activities; ca -- also;
vividhah -- various; kriyante -- are done; moksa-kanksibhih -- by those who actually desire liberation.
TRANSLATION
Without desiring fruitive results, one should perform various kinds of sacrifice, penance and charity with
the word tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from material entanglement.
Text 26-27
To the nature of the Supreme and its devotion is following the resounding of the word Sat used in the
agreed upon activities, o son of Prithâ. In the case of sacrifice, penance and charity is sat thus also for
sure uttered to indicate the activities meant and the Absolute of the truth.
SANSKRIT

sad-bhâve sâdhu-bhâve ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
prasaste karmani tathâ
sac-chabdah pârtha yujyate
yajne tapasi dâne ca
sthitih sad iti cocyate
karma caiva tad-arthîyam
sad ity evâbhidhîyate
WORD FOR WORD
sat-bhave -- in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sadhu-bhave -- in the sense of the nature of the
devotee; ca -- also; sat -- the word sat; iti -- thus; etat -- this; prayujyate -- is used; prasaste -- in bona
fide; karmani -- activities; tatha -- also; sat-sabdah -- the sound sat; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; yujyate -- is
used;
Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 8 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda
yajne -- in sacrifice; tapasi -- in penance; dane -- in charity; ca -- also; sthitih -- the situation; sat -- the
Supreme; iti -- thus; ca -- and; ucyate -- is pronounced; karma -- work; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; tat -for that; arthiyam -- meant; sat -- the Supreme; iti -- thus; eva -- certainly; abhidhiyate -- is indicated.
TRANSLATION
The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is indicated by the word sat. The
performer of such sacrifice is also called sat, as are all works of sacrifice, penance and charity which, true
to the absolute nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son of Prithâ.
Text 28
That which is offered, given and performed with penance without faith in all this is said to be false, o son
of Prithâ, and that is nor useful here nor in the hereafter.
SANSKRIT

asraddhayâ hutam dattam
tapas taptam krtam ca yat
asad ity ucyate pârtha
na ca tat pretya no iha
WORD FOR WORD
asraddhaya -- without faith; hutam -- offered in sacrifice; dattam --,given; tapah -- penance; taptam -executed; krtam -- performed; ca -- also; yat -- that which; asat -- false; iti -- thus; ucyate -- is said to be;
Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; na -- never; ca -- also; tat -- that; pretya -- after death; na u -- nor; iha -- in this
life.
TRANSLATION
Anything done as sacrifice, charity or penance without faith in the Supreme, O son of Prithâ, is
impermanent. It is called asat and is useless both in this life and the next.

Chapter17 - The Yoga of Division of Faith

…Page 9 of 9

The Bhagavad Gita

Chapter 18a

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

The Yoga of liberation through Renunciation

About renunciation and its threefold nature
Text 1
Arjuna said: 'One by one I wish to know about the reality of the renounced order, o mighty armed one, and
to understand what renunciation is, o master of the senses, killer of Kes'î [Kes'î was a mad horse once
defeated by Krishna ].
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
sannyâsasya mahâbâho
tattvam icchâmi veditum
tyâgasya ca hrsîkesa
prthak kesinisûdana
WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; sannyâsasya -- of renunciation; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; tattvam - the truth; icchami -- I wish; veditum -- to understand; tyagasya -- of renunciation; ca -- also; hrsikesa -O master of the senses; prthak -- differently; kesi- nisudana -- O killer of the Kes'î demon.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of renunciation [tyaga] and of the
renounced order of life [sannyâsa], O killer of the Kes'î demon, master of the senses.
Text 2
The Supreme Lord said: 'Giving up the desire of [material] activities is what the learned know as the
renounced order [sannyâs] while the forsaking of all fruits of action is what the experienced call
renunciation [tyâga].
SANSKRIT

srî-bhagavân uvâca
kâmyânâm karmanâm nyâsam
sannyâsam kavayo viduh
sarva-karma-phala-tyâgam
prâhus tyâgam vicaksanâh
WORD FOR WORD
sri-bhagavan uvaca -- the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kamyanam -- with desire; karmanam -- of
activities; nyasam -- renunciation; sannyâsam -- the renounced order of life; kavayah -- the learned; viduh
-- know; sarva -- of all; karma -- activities; phala -- of results; tyagam -- renunciation; prahuh -- call;
tyagam -- renunciation; vicaksanah -- the experienced.

Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 1 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The giving up of activities that are based on material desire is
what great learned men call the renounced order of life [sannyâsa]. And giving up the results of all
activities is what the wise call renunciation [tyaga].
Text 3
One group of great minds says that fruitive work [karma] is an evil and must thus be given up while others
say that the works of sacrifice, charity and penance are never to be given up in this.
SANSKRIT

tyâjyam dosa-vad ity eke
karma prâhur manîsinah
yajna-dâna-tapah-karma
na tyâjyam iti câpare

WORD FOR WORD
tyajyam -- must be given up; dosa-vat -- as an evil; iti -- thus; eke -- one group; karma -- work; prahuh -they say; manisinah -- great thinkers; yajna -- of sacrifice; dana -- charity; tapah -- and penance; karma -works; na -- never; tyajyam -- are to be given up; iti -- thus; ca -- and; apare -- others.
TRANSLATION
Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given up as faulty, yet other sages
maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.
Text 4
To be sure about this renunciation, o best of the Bhâratas, it is in fact declared to be of three kinds, o
tiger among men:
SANSKRIT

niscayam srnu me tatra
tyâge bharata-sattama
tyâgo hi purusa-vyâghra
tri-vidhah samprakîrtitah

WORD FOR WORD
niscayam -- certainty; srnu -- hear; me -- from Me; tatra -- therein; tyage -- in the matter of renunciation;
bharata-sat-tama -- O best of the Bhâratas; tyagah -- renunciation; hi -- certainly; purusa-vyaghra -- O
tiger among human beings; tri-vidhah -- of three kinds; samprakirtitah -- is declared.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bhâratas, now hear My judgment about renunciation. O tiger among men, renunciation is
declared in the scriptures to be of three kinds.
Text 5
Sacrifice, charity and penance; they are never to be given up and for sure obliged to do that sacrifice,
charity and penance is there even for the great souls purification.
SANSKRIT

yajna-dâna-tapah-karma
na tyâjyam kâryam eva tat
yajno dânam tapas caiva
pâvanâni manîsinâm

WORD FOR WORD
yajna -- of sacrifice; dana -- charity; tapah -- and penance; karma -- activity; na -- never; tyajyam -- to be
given up; karyam -- must be done; eva -- certainly; tat -- that; yajnah -- sacrifice; danam -- charity; tapah
-- penance; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; pavanani -- purifying; manisinam -- even for the great souls.
TRANSLATION
Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up; they must be performed. Indeed, sacrifice,
charity and penance purify even the great souls.
Text 6
But with all these activities must without doubt, performing them out of duty, the association with their
results be given up; that, o son of Prithâ, is My last and best word on it.
SANSKRIT

etâny api tu karmâni
sangam tyaktvâ phalâni ca
kartavyânîti me pârtha
niscitam matam uttamam
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 2 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
etani -- all these; api -- certainly; tu -- but; karmani -- activities; sangam -- association; tyaktva -renouncing; phalani -- results; ca -- also; kartavyani -- should be done as duty; iti -- thus; me -- My; Prithâ- O son of Prithâ; niscitam -- definite; matam -- opinion; uttamam -- the best.
TRANSLATION
All these activities should be performed without attachment or any expectation of result. They should be
performed as a matter of duty, O son of Prithâ. That is My final opinion.
Text 7
Renunciation then of activities never implies the forsaking of prescribed duties; a renunciation thus led by
illusion is declared to be of ignorance.
SANSKRIT

niyatasya tu sannyâsah
karmano nopapadyate
mohât tasya parityâgas
tâmasah parikîrtitah

WORD FOR WORD
niyatasya -- prescribed; tu -- but; sannyâsah -- renunciation; karmanah -- of activities; na -- never;
upapadyate -- is deserved; mohat -- by illusion; tasya -- of them; parityagah -- renunciation; tamasah -- in
the mode of ignorance; parikirtitah -- is declared.
TRANSLATION
Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If one gives up his prescribed duties because of illusion,
such renunciation is said to be in the mode of ignorance.
Text 8
He who performs renunciation and gives up out of fear, because such a workload might be troublesome or
a discomfort to the body, is for sure of passion and never certain of the outcome.
SANSKRIT

duhkham ity eva yat karma
kâya-klesa-bhayât tyajyt
sa krtvâ râjasam tyâgam
naiva tyâga-phalam labhet
WORD FOR WORD
duhkham -- unhappy; iti -- thus; eva -- certainly; yat -- which; karma -- work; kaya -- for the body; klesa -trouble; bhayat -- out of fear; tyajet -- gives up; sah -- he; krtva -- after doing; rajasam -- in the mode of
passion; tyagam -- renunciation; na -- not; eva -- certainly; tyaga -- of renunciation; phalam -- the results;
labhet -- gains.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome or out of fear of bodily discomfort is said to have
renounced in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the elevation of renunciation.
Text 9
Prescribed work then indeed done out of discipline, o Arjuna, and in association with giving up on the
result - that renunciation is, in My view, of goodness.
SANSKRIT

kâryam ity eva yat karma
niyatam kriyate 'rjuna
sangam tyaktvâ phalam caiva
sa tyâgah sâttviko matah
WORD FOR WORD
karyam -- it must be done; iti -- thus; eva -- indeed; yat -- which; karma -- work; niyatam -- prescribed;
kriyate -- is performed; arjuna -- O Arjuna; sangam -- association; tyaktva -- giving up; phalam -- the
result; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; sah -- that; tyagah -- renunciation; sattvikah -- in the mode of
goodness; matah -- in My opinion.
TRANSLATION
O Arjuna, when one performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be done, and renounces all
material association and all attachment to the fruit, his renunciation is said to be in the mode of
goodness.
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 3 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 10
The renouncer who never hates disagreeable work nor gets attached to the agreeable is absorbed in
goodness and has an intelligence free from doubt.
SANSKRIT

na dvesty akusalam karma
kusale nânusajjate
tyâgî sattva-samâvisto
medhâvî chinna-samsayah

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; dvesti -- hates; akusalam -- inauspicious; karma -- work; kusale -- in the auspicious; na -- nor;
anusajjate -- becomes attached; tyagi -- the renouncer; sattva -- in goodness; samavistah -- absorbed;
medhavi -- intelligent; chinna -- having cut off; samsayah -- all doubts.
TRANSLATION
The intelligent renouncer situated in the mode of goodness, neither hateful of inauspicious work nor
attached to auspicious work, has no doubts about work.
Text 11
For sure it is not possible for the embodied one to be renounced in all activities together, but the
renouncer is said to be anyone who is the renouncer of the fruit of labor.
SANSKRIT

na hi deha-bhrtâ sakyam
tyaktum karmâny asesatah
yas tu karma-phala-tyâgî
sa tyâgîty abhidhîyate

WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; hi -- certainly; deha-bhrta -- by the embodied; sakyam -- is possible; tyaktum -- to be
renounced; karmani -- activities; asesatah -- altogether; yah -- anyone who; tu -- but; karma -- of work;
phala -- of the result; tyagi -- the renouncer; sah -- he; tyagi -- the renouncer; iti -- thus; abhidhiyate -- is
said.
TRANSLATION
It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities. But he who renounces the fruits of
action is called one who has truly renounced.
Text 12
The tree kinds of karmic consequence of finding things going to hell, reaching to heaven or having a
mixture of these, come after leaving the world for those who did not renounce, but this is never the case
for the renounced order.
SANSKRIT

anistam istam misram ca
tri-vidham karmanah phalam
bhavaty atyâginâm pretya
na tu sannyâsinâm kvacit

WORD FOR WORD
anistam -- leading to hell; istam -- leading to heaven; misram -- mixed; ca -- and; tri-vidham -- of three
kinds; karmanah -- of work;phalam -- the result; bhavati -- comes; atyaginam -- for those who are not
renounced; pretya -- after death; na -- not; tu -- but; sannyâsinam -- for the renounced order; kvacit -- at
any time.
TRANSLATION
For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action -- desirable, undesirable and mixed -- accrue
after death. But those who are in the renounced order of life have no such result to suffer or enjoy.
Text 13
Understand from Me that it is said that, in the end of vedic analysis, o mighty armed one, for the
perfection of all activities, there are these five agents:
SANSKRIT

pancaitâni mahâ-bâho
kâranâni nibodha me
sânkhye krtânte proktâni
siddhaye sarva-karmanâm

Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 4 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
panca -- five; etani -- these; maha-baho -- O mighty-armed one; karanani -- causes; nibodha- just
understand; me -- from Me; sankhye -- in the Vedanta; krta-ante -- in the conclusion; proktani -- said;
siddhaye -- for the perfection; sarva -- of all; karmanam -- activities.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed Arjuna, according to the Vedanta there are five causes for the accomplishment of all
action. Now learn of these from Me.
Text 14
The place, the doer, the variety of different means and the separate ways as surely also the divine as the
fifth.
SANSKRIT

adhisthânam tathâ kartâ
karanam ca prthag-vidham
vividhâs ca prthak cestâ
daivam caivâtra pancamam
WORD FOR WORD
adhisthanam -- the place; tatha -- also; karta -- the worker; karanam -- instruments; ca -- and; prthakvidham -- of different kinds; vividhah -- various; ca -- and; prthak -- separate; cestah -- the endeavors;
daivam -- the Supreme; ca -- also; eva -- certainly; atra -- here; pancamam -- the fifth.
TRANSLATION
The place of action [the body], the performer, the various senses, the many different kinds of endeavor,
and ultimately the Supersoul -- these are the five factors of action.
Text 15
These are the five that lead to all the karma which one physically takes up, in speech and in mind, doing
right or the contrary.
SANSKRIT

sarîra-vânmanobhir yat
karma prârabhate narah
nyâyyam vâ viparîtam vâ
pancaite tasya hetavah

WORD FOR WORD
sarira -- by the body; vak -- speech; manobhih -- and mind; yat -- which; karma -- work; prarabhate -begins; narah -- a person; nyayyam -- right; va -- or; viparitam -- the opposite; va -- or; panca -- five, ete - all these; tasya -- its; hetavah -- causes.
TRANSLATION
Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is caused by these five factors.
Text 16
So, anyone who sees his soul in this as the only agent is then not led by intelligence; he is of a foolish
vision.
SANSKRIT

tatraivam sati kartâram
âtmânam kevalam tu yah
pasyaty akrta-buddhitvân
na sa pasyati durmatih
WORD FOR WORD
tatra -- there; evam -- thus; sati -- being; kartaram -- the worker; atmanam -- himself; kevalam -- only; tu
-- but; yah -- anyone who; pasyati -- sees; akrta-buddhitvat -- due to unintelligence; na -- never; sah -- he;
pasyati -- sees; durmatih -- foolish.
TRANSLATION
Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five factors, is certainly not very
intelligent and cannot see things as they are.
Text 17
One whose nature is never falsely identified; one whose intelligence is never blinded; he, even killing in
this world, never kills nor does he become entangled.
SANSKRIT

yasya nâhankrto bhâvo
buddhir yasya na lipyate

Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 5 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

hatvâpi sa imâl lokân
na hanti na nibadhyate
WORD FOR WORD
yasya -- one whose; na -- never; ahankrtah -- of false ego; bhavah -- nature; buddhih -- intelligence; yasya
-- one whose; na -- never; lipyate -- is attached; hatva -- killing; api -- even; sah -- he; iman -- this; lokan
-- world; na -- never; hanti -- kills; na -- never; nibadhyate -- becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled, though he kills men in this
world, does not kill. Nor is he bound by his actions.
Text 18
Knowledge, the known and knower are the three incentives for action; the senses [or sense-organs], the
karma and the doer are, as
you
know,the
threefold
constituents.
SANSKRIT

jnânam jneyam parijnâtâ
tri-vidhâ karma-codanâ
karanam karma karteti
tri-vidhah karmasangrahah

WORD FOR WORD
jñânam -- knowledge; jneyam
-the
objective
of
knowledge; parijnata -- the
knower; tri-vidha -- of three
kinds; karma -- of work;
codana -- the impetus;
karanam -- the senses; karma
-- the work; karta -- the doer;
iti -- thus; tri-vidhah -- of
three kinds; karma -- of work;
sangrahah
-the
accumulation.
TRANSLATION
Knowledge, the object of
knowledge, and the knower
are the three factors that
motivate action; the senses,
the work and the doer are the
three constituents of action.
Text 19
One says that knowledge,
action and the doer are for
certain as well of three kinds
in terms of the three modes
of nature; hear also how they
are all set apart.
SANSKRIT

jnânam karma ca kartâ ca
tridhaiva guna-bhedatah
procyate guna-sankhyâne
yathâvac chrnu tâny api
WORD FOR WORD
jñânam -- knowledge; karma -- work; ca -- also; karta -- worker; ca -- also; tridha -- of three kinds; eva -certainly; guna-bhedatah -- in terms of different modes of material nature; procyate -- are said; gunasankhyane -- in terms of different modes; yatha-vat -- as they are; srnu -- hear; tani -- all of them; api -also.
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 6 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
According to the three different modes of material nature, there are three kinds of knowledge, action and
performer of action. Now hear of them from Me.
Text 20
That knowledge by which one sees the imperishable ground of all living entities as undivided although they
are in number divided, you should know to be in goodness.
SANSKRIT

sarva-bhûtesu yenaikam
bhâvam avyayam îksate
avibhaktam vibhaktesu
taj jnânam viddhi sâttvikam
WORD FOR WORD
sarva-bhutesu -- in all living entities; yena -- by which; ekam -- one; bhavam -- situation; avyayam -imperishable; iksate -- one sees; avibhaktam -- undivided; vibhaktesu -- in the numberless divided; tat -that; jñânam -- knowledge; viddhi -- know; sattvikam -- in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all living entities, though they are
divided into innumerable forms, you should understand to be in the mode of goodness.
Text 21
But that knowledge which of division to the diverse situations understands [that ground] as different in all
the living beings must be known as being of passion.
SANSKRIT

prthaktvena tu yaj jnânam
nânâ-bhâvân-prthag-vidhân
vetti sarvesu bhûtesu
taj jnânam viddhi râjasam

WORD FOR WORD
Prithâ ktvena -- because of division; tu -- but; yat -- which; jñânam -- knowledge; nana-bhavan -multifarious situations; prthak-vidhan -- different; vetti -- knows; sarvesu -- in all; bhutesu -- living
entities; tat -- that; jñânam -- knowledge; viddhi -- must be known; rajasam -- in terms of passion.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge by which one sees that in every different body there is a different type of living entity
you should understand to be in the mode of passion.
Text 22
And that [knowing] which is fixed on one type of work as if that would be all, is unfounded, lacks in reality
and is too easy; it is said to be of darkness.
SANSKRIT

yat tu krtsna-vad ekasmin
kârye saktam ahaitukam
atattvârthavad alpam ca
tat tâmasam udâhrtam

WORD FOR WORD
yat -- that which; tu -- but; krtsna-vat -- as all in all; ekasmin -- in one; karye -- work; saktam -- attached;
ahaitukam -- without cause; atattva-artha-vat -- without knowledge of reality; alpam -- very meager; ca -and; tat -- that; tamasam -- in the mode of darkness; udahrtam -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all in all, without knowledge of
the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in the mode of darkness.
Text 23
That action which is regulated, without attachment, like or dislike and done without desiring the result is
said to be of goodness.
SANSKRIT

niyatam sanga-rahitam
arâga-dvesatah krtam
aphala-prepsunâ karma
yat tat sâttvikam ucyate
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 7 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
niyatam -- regulated; sanga-rahitam -- without attachment; araga-dvesatah -- without love or hatred;
krtam -- done; aphala-prepsuna -- by one without desire for fruitive result; karma -- action; yat -- which;
tat -- that; sattvikam -- in the mode of goodness; ucyate -- is called.
TRANSLATION
That action which is regulated and which is performed without attachment, without love or hatred, and
without desire for fruitive results is said to be in the mode of goodness.
Text 24
But that work which is done in hot pursuit, identified with the material, or again is done with a lot of
pressure; that is said to be in the mode of passion.
SANSKRIT

yat tu kâmepsunâ karma
sâhankârena vâ punah
kriyate bahulâyâsam
tad râjasam udâhrtam

WORD FOR WORD
yat -- that which; tu -- but; kama-ipsuna -- by one with desires for fruitive results; karma -- work; saahankarena -- with ego; va -- or; punah -- again; kriyate -- is performed; bahula-ayasam -- with great
labor; tat -- that; rajasam -- in the mode of passion; udahrtam -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his desires, and enacted from a sense of
false ego, is called action in the mode of passion.
Text 25
But that work which is after attachment, is destructive, causes distress and has no regard for the
consequences or is begun being mistaken about ones own capacity; that is said to be of ignorance.
SANSKRIT

anubandham ksayam himsâm
anapeksya ca paurusam
mohâd ârabhyate karma
yat tat tâmasam ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
anubandham -- of future bondage; ksayam -- destruction; himsam -- and distress to others; anapeksya -without considering the consequences; ca -- also; paurusam -- self-sanctioned; mohat -- by illusion;
arabhyate -- is begun; karma -- work; yat -- which; tat -- that; tamasam -- in the mode of ignorance;
ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
That action performed in illusion, in disregard of scriptural injunctions, and without concern for future
bondage or for violence or distress caused to others is said to be in the mode of ignorance.
Text 26
A worker freed from attachment, not to the service of the body, qualified with resolve doing the best he
can, unwavering in accomplishment and failure, one says is in the mode of goodness.
SANSKRIT

mukta-sango 'nahamvâdî
dhrty-utsâha-samanvitah
siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikârah.
kartâ sâttvika ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
mukta-sangah -- liberated from all material association; anaham-vadi -- without false ego; dhrti -- with
determination; utsaha -- and great enthusiasm; samanvitah -- qualified; siddhi -- in perfection; asiddhyoh
-- and failure; nirvikarah -- without change; karta -- worker; sattvikah -- in the mode of goodness; ucyate - is said to be.
TRANSLATION
One who performs his duty without association with the modes of material nature, without false ego, with
great determination and enthusiasm, and without wavering in success or failure is said to be a worker in
the mode of goodness.
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 8 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 27
A worker is declared to be of passion if he is very attached in his desire of working for the result, is
avaricious, of a violent nature,impure in his motives and led by joy and sorrow.
SANSKRIT

râgî karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho himsâtmako 'sucih
harsa-sokânvitah kartâ
râjasah parikîrtitah

WORD FOR WORD
ragi -- very much attached; karma-phala -- the fruit of the work; prepsuh -- desiring; lubdhah -- greedy;
himsa-atmakah -- always envious; asucih -- unclean; harsa-soka-anvitah -- subject to joy and sorrow; karta
-- such a worker; rajasah -- in the mode of passion; parikirtitah -- is declared.
TRANSLATION
The worker who is attached to work and the fruits of work, desiring to enjoy those fruits, and who is
greedy, always envious, impure, and moved by joy and sorrow, is said to be in the mode of passion.
Text 28
Unconnected, materialistic, obstinate, deceitful, waging against others, lazy, morose and procrastinating
is what one says of the worker in the mode of ignorance.
SANSKRIT

ayuktah prâkrtah stabdhah
satho naiskrtiko 'lasah
visâdî dîrgha-sûtrî ca
kartâ tâmasa ucyate
WORD FOR WORD
ayuktah -- not referring to the scriptural injunctions; prakrtah -- materialistic; stabdhah -- obstinate;
sathah -- deceitful; naiskrtikah -- expert in insulting others; alasah -- lazy; visadi -- morose; dirgha-sutri -procrastinating; ca -- also; karta -- worker; tamasah -- in the mode of ignorance; ucyate -- is said to be.
TRANSLATION
The worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions of the scripture, who is materialistic,
obstinate, cheating and expert in insulting others, and who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating is
said to be a worker in the mode of ignorance.
Text 29
O winner of wealth, now listen as I describe you in detail how the individual types of intelligence and
conviction are certainly also differing in three kinds to the modes of nature.
SANSKRIT

buddher bhedam dhrtes caiva
gunatas tri-vidham srnu
procyamânam asesena
prthaktvena dhananjaya
WORD FOR WORD
buddheh -- of intelligence; bhedam -- the differences; dhrteh -- of steadiness; ca -- also; eva -- certainly;
gunatah -- by the modes of material nature; tri-vidham -- of three kinds; srnu -- just hear; procyamanam - as described by Me; asesena -- in detail; Prithâ ktvena -- differently; dhananjaya -- O winner of wealth.
TRANSLATION
O winner of wealth, now please listen as I tell you in detail of the different kinds of understanding and
determination, according to the three modes of material nature.
Text 30
O son of Prithâ, understanding, which knows how to move onwards and how to refrain from it, what
should be done and what not, what is to be feared and not to be feared and what is of bondage and what
of liberation; know that to be of goodness.
SANSKRIT

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
kâryâkârye bhayâbhaye
bandham moksam ca yâ vetti
buddhih sâ pârtha sâttvikî
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 9 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
pravrttim -- doing; ca -- also; nivrttim -- not doing; ca -- and; karya -- what ought to be done; akarye -and what ought not to be done; bhaya -- fear; abhaye -- and fearlessness; bandham -- bondage; moksam -liberation; ca -- and; ya -- that which; vetti -- knows; buddhih -- understanding; sa -- that; Prithâ-- O son
of Prithâ; sattviki -- in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be done and what ought not to be
done, what is to be feared and what is not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, is in the
mode of goodness.
Text 31
Not precisely knowing of what is to the original nature and what goes against, what would be right and
what would be wrong; that intelligence, o son of Prithâ, is in the mode of passion.
SANSKRIT

yayâ dharmam adharmam ca
kâryam câkâryam eva ca
ayathâvat prajânâti
buddhih sâ pârtha râjasî

WORD FOR WORD
yaya -- by which; dharmam -- the principles of religion; adharmam -- irreligion; ca -- and; karyam -- what
ought to be done; ca -- also; akaryam -- what ought not to be done; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; ayatha-vat
-- imperfectly; prajanati -- knows; buddhih -- intelligence; sa -- that; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; rajasi -- in
the mode of passion.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, that understanding which cannot distinguish between religion and irreligion, between
action that should be done and action that should not be done, is in the mode of passion.
Text 32
The intelligence which thus covered by illusion thinks unrighteousness to be true nature and thinks that
everything goes the wrong way; that intelligence, o son of Prithâ, is of ignorance.
SANSKRIT

adharmam dharmam iti yâ
manyate tamasâvrtâ
sarvârthân viparîtâms ca
buddhih sâ pârtha tâmasî

WORD FOR WORD
adharmam -- irreligion; dharmam -- religion; iti -- thus; ya -- which; manyate -- thinks; tamasa -- by
illusion; avrta -- covered; sarva-arthan -- all things; viparitan -- in the wrong direction; ca -- also; buddhih
-- intelligence; sa -- that; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ;tamasi -- in the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to be irreligion, under the spell of
illusion and darkness, and strives always in the wrong direction, O Prithâ, is in the mode of ignorance.
Text 33
That bearing which by an unbroken practice of yoga retains the activity of the mind, the life-force and the
sense-organs; that resolve, o son of Prithâ, is of the mode of goodness.
SANSKRIT

dhrtyâ yayâ dhârayate
manah-prânendriya-kriyâh
yogenâvyabhicârinyâ
dhrtih sâ pârtha sâttvikî
WORD FOR WORD
dhrtya -- determination; yaya -- by which; dharayate -- one sustains; manah -- of the mind; prana -- life;
indriya -- and senses; kriyah -- the activities; yogena -- by yoga practice; avyabhicarinya -- without any
break; dhrtih -- determination; sa -- that; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; sattviki -- in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained with steadfastness by yoga
practice, and which thus controls the activities of the mind, life and senses is determination in the mode
of goodness.
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 10 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 34
But the attitude, o Arjuna, by which one holds on to ones righteous duty, enjoyment and material progress
out of attachment in desiring the fruits; that determination, o son of Prithâ is in the mode of passion.
SANSKRIT

yayâ tu dharma-kâmârthân
dhrtyâ dhârayate 'rjuna
prasangena phalâkânksî
dhrtih sâ pârtha râjasî
WORD FOR WORD
yaya -- by which; tu -- but; dharma -- religiosity; kama -- sense gratification; arthan -- and economic
development; dhrtya -- by determination; dharayate -- one sustains; arjuna -- O Arjuna; prasangena -because of attachment; phala-akanksi -- desiring fruitive results; dhrtih -- determination; sa -- that;
prthâ-- O son of Prithâ; rajasi -- in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATION
But that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in religion, economic development and
sense gratification is of the nature of passion, O Arjuna.
Text 35
That will by which one never gives up the sleeping, fearing, lamenting, drooping and surely also the
presuming, is of an unintelligent attitude in the mode of ignorance, o son of Prithâ.
SANSKRIT

yayâ svapnam bhayam sokam
visâdam madam eva ca
na vimuncati durmedhâ
dhrtih sâ pârtha tâmasî
WORD FOR WORD
yaya -- by which; svapnam -- dreaming; bhayam -- fearfulness; sokam -- lamentation; visadam -moroseness; madam -- illusion; eva -- certainly; ca -- also; na -- never; vimuncati -- one gives up;
durmedha -- unintelligent; dhrtih -- determination; sa -- that; prthâ-- O son of Prithâ; tamasi -- in the
mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness, lamentation, moroseness and
illusion -- such unintelligent determination, O son of Prithâ, is in the mode of darkness.
Text 36
But hear from Me now about three kinds of happiness one enjoys by fortitude, o best amongst the
Bhâratas and of which one reaches the end of sorrow.
SANSKRIT

sukham tv idânîm tri-vidham
srnu me bharatarsabha
abhyâsâd ramate yatra
duhkhântam ca nigacchati

WORD FOR WORD
sukham -- happiness; tu -- but; idanim -- now; tri vidham -- of three kinds; srnu -- hear; me -- from Me;
bharata-rsabha -- O best amongst the Bhâratas; abhyasat -- by practice; ramate -- one enjoys; yatra -where; duhkha -- of distress; antam -- the end; ca -- also; nigacchati -- gains.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bhâratas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds of happiness by which the
conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he sometimes comes to the end of all distress.
Text 37
That happiness which is in the beginning like poison but in the end compares to nectar, is in the mode of
goodness said to be born in the soul from the grace of intelligence.
SANSKRIT

yat tad agre visam iva
parinâme 'mrtopamam
tat sukham sâttvikam proktam
âtma-buddhi-prasâda-jam
WORD FOR WORD
yat -- which; tat -- that; agre -- in the beginning; visam iva -- like poison; pariname -- at the end; amrta -nectar; upamam -- compared to; tat -- that; sukham -- happiness; sattvikam -- in the mode of goodness;
proktam -- is said; atma -- in the self; buddhi -- of intelligence; prasada-jam -- born of the satisfaction.
Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 11 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
That which in the beginning may be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and which awakens
one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode of goodness.
Text 38
That happiness which results from the contact of the senses with the sense-objects and which in the
beginning is just like nectar but in the end is like poison; that happiness is considered to be in the mode of
passion.
SANSKRIT

visayendriya-samyogâd
yat tad agre 'mrtopamam
parinâme visam iva
tat sukham râjasam smrtam

WORD FOR WORD
visaya -- of the objects of the senses; indriya -- and the senses; samyogat -- from the combination; yat -which; tat -- that; agre -- in the beginning; amrta-upamam -- just like nectar; pariname -- at the end;
visam iva -- like poison; tat -- that; sukham -- happiness; rajasam -- in the mode of passion; smrtam -- is
considered.
TRANSLATION
That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their objects and which appears like
nectar at first but poison at the end is said to be of the nature of passion.
Text 39
That which from the beginning to the end is happiness produced by selfdeception, sloth, laziness and
misunderstanding, that is said to be of ignorance.
SANSKRIT

yad agre cânubandhe ca
sukham mohanam âtmanah
nidrâlasya-pramâdottham
tat tâmasam udâhrtam

WORD FOR WORD
yat -- that which; agre -- in the beginning; ca -- also; anubandhe -- at the end; ca -- also; sukham -happiness; mohanam -- illusory; atmanah -- of the self; nidra -- sleep; alasya -- laziness; pramada -- and
illusion; uttham -- produced of; tat -- that; tamasam -- in the mode of ignorance; udahrtam -- is said to
be.
TRANSLATION
And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from beginning to end and which
arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.
Text 40
There is no being in existence either on earth or in the higher spheres among the divine, which is free
from the influence of these three modes of material nature.
SANSKRIT

na tad asti prthivyâm vâ
divi devesu vâ punah
sattvam prakriti-jair muktam
yad ebhih syât tribhir gunaih
WORD FOR WORD
na -- not; tat -- that; asti -- there is; prthivyam -- on the earth; va -- or; divi -- in the higher planetary
system; devesu -- amongst the demigods; va -- or; punah -- again; sattvam -- existence; prakriti-jaih -born of material nature; muktam -- liberated; yat -- that; ebhih -- from the influence of these; syat -- is;
tribhih -- three; gunaih -- modes of material nature.
TRANSLATION
There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher planetary systems, which is
freed from these three modes born of material nature.
PURPORT
The Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of material nature all over the universe.

Chapter 18a - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 12 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

Chapter 18b

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

The Yoga of liberation through Renunciation

About renunciation (its threefold nature) and its service with the divisions of society
as the ultimate of liberation
Text 41
'O chastiser of the enemy, the activities of the intellectuals and priests (brahmins), the rulers and the
military (kshatriyas), the traders and farmers (vais'yas) and the servants and laborers (s'ûdras), are divided
to their own natures that originate from the material modes.
SANSKRIT

brâhmana-kshatriya-visâm
sûdrânâm ca parantapa
karmâni pravibhaktâni
svabhâva-prabhavair gunaih

WORD FOR WORD
brahmana -- of the brahmanas; kshatriya -- the
kshatriyas; visam -- and the vais'yas; s'ûdranam
-- of the s'ûdras; ca -- and; parantapa -- O
subduer of the enemies; karmani -- the
activities; pravibhaktani -- are divided;
svabhava -- their own nature; prabhavaih -born of; gunaih -- by the modes of material
nature.
TRANSLATION
Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vais'yas and s'ûdras are
distinguished by the qualities born of their own
natures in accordance with the material modes,
O chastiser of the enemy.
Text 42
Equable,
self-controlled,
austere,
pure,
tolerant, and surely straight and of knowledge,
wisdom and belief in God is of a brahmin the
activity born from his own nature.
SANSKRIT

samo damas tapah saucam
ksântir ârjavam eva ca
jnânam vijnânam âstikyam
brahma-karma svabhâva-jam
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 1 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
samah -- peacefulness; damah -- self-control; tapah -- austerity; saucam -- purity; ksantih -- tolerance;
arjavam -- honesty; eva -- certainly; ca -- and; jñânam -- knowledge; vijñânam -- wisdom; astikyam -religiousness; brahma -- of a brahmana; karma -- duty; svabhavajam -- born of his own nature.
TRANSLATION
Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, knowledge, wisdom and religiousness -these are the natural qualities by which the brahmanas work.
Text 43
Valor, vigor, determination, resourcefulness in opposition and not fleeing, generous and taking the lead is
the occupation born from the nature of a kshatriya.
SANSKRIT

sauryam tejo dhrtir dâksyam
yuddhe câpy apalâyanam
dânam îsvara-bhâvas ca
ksâtram karma svabhâva-jam

WORD FOR WORD
sauryam -- heroism; tejah -- power; dhrtih -- determination; daksyam -- resourcefulness; yuddhe -- in
battle; ca -- and; api -- also; apalayanam -- not fleeing; danam -- generosity; isvara -- of leadership;
bhavah -- the nature; ca -- and; ksatram -- of a kshatriya; karma -- duty; svabhava-jam -- born of his own
nature.
TRANSLATION
Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle, generosity and leadership are the
natural qualities of work for the kshatriyas.
Text 44
Plowing, tending cows and trade is the natural way of a vais'ya while the nature of a s'ûdra's duty consists
of being of service.
SANSKRIT

krsi-go-raksya-vânijyam
vais'ya-karma svabhâva-jam
paricaryâtmakam karma
s'ûdrasyâpi svabhâva-jam
WORD FOR WORD
krsi -- plowing; go -- of cows; raksya -- protection; vanijyam -- trade; vais'ya -- of a vais'ya; karma -- duty;
svabhava jam -- born of his own nature; paricarya -- service; atmakam -- consisting of; karma -- duty;
s'ûdrasya -- of the s'ûdra; api -- also; svabhava-jam -- born of his own nature.
TRANSLATION
Farming, cow protection and business are the natural work for the vais'yas, and for the s'ûdras there is
labor and service to others.
Text 45
Each fulfilling his own duty does man gain in perfection. Now listen how doing ones own job that maturity
is attained.
SANSKRIT

sve sve karmany abhiratah
samsiddhim labhate narah
sva-karma-niratah siddhim
yathâ vindati tac chrnu
WORD FOR WORD
sve sve -- each his own; karmani -- work; abhiratah -- following; samsiddhim -- perfection; labhate -achieves; narah -- a man; sva-karma -- in his own duty; niratah -- engaged; siddhim -- perfection; yatha -as; vindati -- attains; tat -- that; srnu -- listen.
TRANSLATION
By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now please hear from Me how this can
be done.
Text 46
From whom all living entities emanated, by whom all this is pervaded; doing his own duties in respect of
Him, a man achieves perfection.
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 2 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

yatah pravrttir bhûtânâm
yena sarvam idam tatam
svakarmanâ tam abhyarcya
siddhim vindati mânavah
WORD FOR WORD
yatah -- from whom; pravrttih -- the emanation; bhutanam -- of all living entities; yena -- by whom;
sarvam -- all; idam -- this; tatam -- is pervaded; sva-karmana -- by his own duties; tam -- Him; abhyarcya - by worshiping; siddhim -- perfection; vindati -- achieves; manavah -- a man.
TRANSLATION
By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-pervading, a man can attain
perfection through performing his own work.
Text 47
It is better to be unsuccessful with ones own duty than to perform perfect minding another's business as
doing work restricted to one's own nature one will never run into offense.
SANSKRIT

sreyân sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmât svanusthitât
svabhâva-niyatam karma
kurvan nâpnoti kilbisam
WORD FOR WORD
sreyan -- better; sva-dharmah -- one's own occupation; vigunah -- imperfectly performed; para-dharmat -than another's occupation; su-anusthitat -- perfectly done; svabhava-niyatam -- prescribed according to
one's nature; karma -- work; kurvan -- performing; na -- never; apnoti -- achieves; kilbisam -- sinful
reactions.
TRANSLATION
It is better to engage in one's own occupation, even though one may perform it imperfectly, than to
accept another's occupation and perform it perfectly. Duties prescribed according to one's nature are
never affected by sinful reactions.
Text 48
Although faults occur working for a result, o son of Kuntî, one should never give it up as for sure all
beginning is with faults the way fire is covered by smoke.
SANSKRIT

saha-jam karma kaunteya
sa-dosam api na tyajet
sarvârambhâ hi dosena
dhûmenâgnir ivâvrtâh

WORD FOR WORD
saha-jam -- born simultaneously; karma -- work; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; sa-dosam -- with fault; api -although; na -- never; tyajet -- one should give up; sarva-arambhah -- all ventures; hi -- certainly; dosena
-- with fault; dhumena -- with smoke; agnih -- fire; iva -- as; avrtah -- covered.
TRANSLATION
Every endeavor is covered by some fault, just as fire is covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give
up the work born of his nature, O son of Kuntî, even if such work is full of fault.
Text 49
With an unobstructed intelligence in all respect in control of oneself and with the longing gone, one
attains by the renounced order the perfection of freedom from reactions.
SANSKRIT

asakta-buddhih sarvatra
jitâtmâ vigata-sprhah
naiskarmya-siddhim paramâm
sannyâsenâdhigacchati

WORD FOR WORD
asakta-buddhih -- having unattached intelligence; sarvatra -- everywhere; jita-atma -- having control of
the mind; vigata-sprhah -- without material desires; naiskarmya-siddhim -- the perfection of nonreaction;
paramam -- supreme; sannyâsena -- by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati -- one attains.
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 3 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

TRANSLATION
One who is self-controlled and unattached and who disregards all material enjoyments can obtain, by
practice of renunciation, the highest perfect stage of freedom from reaction.
Text 50
Understand from Me how in sum, o son of Kuntî, achieving mastery, without fail the spiritual is achieved;
the stage of knowledge which is transcendental.
SANSKRIT

siddhim prâpto yathâ brahma
tathâpnoti nibodha me
samâsenaiva kaunteya
nisthâ jnânasya yâ parâ
WORD FOR WORD
siddhim -- perfection; praptah -- achieving; yatha -- as; brahma -- the Supreme; tatha -- so; apnoti -- one
achieves; nibodha -- try to understand; me -- from Me; samasena -- summarily; eva -- certainly; kaunteya - O son of Kuntî; nistha -- the stage; jñânasya -- of knowledge; ya -- which; para -- transcendental.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kuntî, learn from Me how one who has achieved this perfection can attain to the supreme
perfectional stage, Brahman, the stage of highest knowledge, by acting in the way I shall now summarize.
Text 51-53
With the intelligence completely cleared, connected in ones determination and also regulating oneself
with things as sounds, giving up on the obects of the senses and refraining from passion and a negative
attitude; living secluded, eating little, with ones speech, mind and body under control, all day in the
beyond of mediation having taken to the shelter of detachment; unidentified with the body, physical
power, false pride, lust, anger and material accumulation, one, freed from possessiveness in peace
qualifies for spiritual realization.
SANSKRIT

buddhyâ visuddhayâ yukto
dhrtyâtmânam niyamya ca
sabdâdîn visayâms tyaktvâ
râga-dvesau vyudasya ca
vivikta-sevî laghv-âsî
yata-vâk-kâya-mânasah
dhyâna-yoga-paro nityam
vairâgyam samupâsritah

ahankâram balam darpam
kâmam krodham parigraham
vimucya nirmamah sânto
brahma-bhûyâya kalpate
WORD FOR WORD
buddhya -- with the intelligence; visuddhaya -- fully purified; yuktah -- engaged; dhrtya -- by
determination; atmanam -- the self; niyamya -- regulating; ca -- also; sabda-adin -- such as sound; visayan
-- the sense objects; tyaktva -- giving up; raga -- attachment; dvesau -- and hatred; vyudasya -- laying
aside; ca -- also;
vivikta-sevi -- living in a secluded place; laghu-asi -- eating a small quantity; yata -- having controlled; vak
-- speech; kaya -- body; manasah -- and mind; dhyana-yoga-parah -- absorbed in trance; nityam -- twentyfour hours a day; vairagyam -- detachment; samupasritah -- having taken shelter of;
ahankaram -- false ego; balam -- false strength; darpam -- false pride; kamam -- lust; krodham -- anger;
parigraham -- and acceptance of material things; vimucya -- being delivered from; nirmamah -- without a
sense of proprietorship; santah -- peaceful; brahma-bhuyaya -- for self-realization; kalpate -- is qualified.
TRANSLATION
Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with determination, giving up the objects of
sense gratification, being freed from attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place, who eats
little, who controls his body, mind and power of speech, who is always in trance and who is detached,
free from false ego, false strength, false pride, lust, anger, and acceptance of material things, free from
false proprietorship, and peaceful -- such a person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 4 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 54
Existing spiritually is the soul pleased, does one never lament, nor desire and is one equal to all living
beings; one gains the transcendental of My devotional service.
SANSKRIT

brahma-bhûtah prasannâtmâ
na socati na kânksati
samah sarvesu bhûtesu
mad-bhaktim labhate parâm

WORD FOR WORD
brahma-bhutah -- being one with the Absolute; prasanna-atma -- fully joyful; na -- never; socati -laments; na -- never; kanksati -- desires; samah -- equally disposed; sarvesu -- to all; bhutesu -- living
entities; mat-bhaktim -- My devotional service; labhate -- gains; param -- transcendental.
TRANSLATION
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful.
He never laments or desires to have anything. He is equally disposed toward every living entity. In that
state he attains pure devotional service unto Me.
Text 55
Through devotion one can know Me as I really am; knowing Me thus in truth he thereafter reaches.
SANSKRIT

bhaktyâ mâm abhijânâti
yâvân yas câsmi tattvatah
tato mâm tattvato jnâtvâ
visate tad-anantaram
WORD FOR WORD
bhaktya -- by pure devotional service; mam -- Me; abhijanati -- one can know; yavan -- as much as; yah ca
asmi -- as I am; tattvatah -- in truth; tatah -- thereafter; mam -- Me; tattvatah -- in truth; jnatva -knowing; visate -- he enters; tat-anantaram -- thereafter.
TRANSLATION
One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And
when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.
Text 56
Despite of always performing all kinds of activities, does one, by the mercy of My protection achieve the
imperishable eternal abode.
SANSKRIT

sarva-karmâny api sadâ
kurvâno mad-vyapâsrayah
mat-prasâdâd avâpnoti
sâsvatam padam avyayam
WORD FOR WORD
sarva -- all; karmani -- activities; api -- although; sada -- always; kurvanah -- performing; mat-vyapasrayah
-- under My protection; mat-prasadat -- by My mercy; avapnoti -- one achieves; sasvatam -- the eternal;
padam -- abode; avyayam -- imperishable.
TRANSLATION
Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My pure devotee, under My protection, reaches the eternal and
imperishable abode by My grace.
Text 57
Just become aware of Me all day by consciously giving up all kinds of activities under My lead, taking to
the shelter of the intelligence of yogic union.
SANSKRIT

cetasâ sarva-karmâni
mayi sannyâsya mat-parah
buddhi-yogam upâsritya
mac-cittah satatam bhava

Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 5 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
cetasa -- by intelligence; sarva-karmani -- all kinds of activities; mayi -- unto Me; sannyâsya -- giving up;
mat-parah -- under My protection; buddhi-yogam -- devotional activities; upasritya -- taking shelter of;
mat-cittah -- in consciousness of Me; satatam -- twenty-four hours a day; bhava- just become.
TRANSLATION
In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection. In such devotional service, be
fully conscious of Me.
Text 58
Being conscious of Me you will overcome all impediments by My mercy but if, identifying with the body,
you do not hear, you will be lost.
SANSKRIT

mac-cittah sarva-durgâni
mat-prasâdât tarisyasi
atha cet tvam ahankârân
na srosyasi vinanksyasi

WORD FOR WORD
mat -- of Me; cittah -- being in consciousness; sarva -- all; durgani -- impediments; mat-prasadat -- by My
mercy; tarisyasi -- you will overcome; atha -- but; cet -- if; tvam -- you; ahankarat -- by false ego; na
srosyasi -- do not hear; vinanksyasi -- you will be lost.
TRANSLATION
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by My grace. If,
however, you do not work in such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be
lost.
Text 59
If, taking to false ego, you think not to fight, then your resolve is all wrong; from your material position
you will have to engage.
SANSKRIT

yad ahankâram âsritya
na yotsya iti manyase
mithyaisa vyavasâyas te
prakritis tvâm niyoksyati
WORD FOR WORD
yat -- if; ahankaram -- of false ego; asritya -- taking shelter; na yotsye -- I shall not fight; iti -- thus;
manyase -- you think; mithya esah -- this is all false; vyavasayah -- determination; te -- your; prakritih -material nature; tvam -- you; niyoksyati -- will engage.
TRANSLATION
If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will be falsely directed. By your
nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.
Text 60
From your own point of view, o son of Kuntî, caught in your own actions, you prefer not to engage in that
which from illusion you will even do involuntarily.
SANSKRIT

svabhâva-jena kaunteya
nibaddhah svena karmanâ
kartum necchasi yan mohât
karisyasy avaso 'pi tat
WORD FOR WORD
svabhava-jena -- born of your own nature; kaunteya -- O son of Kuntî; nibaddhah -- conditioned; svena -by your own; karmana -- activities; kartum -- to do; na -- not; icchasi -- you like; yat -- that which; mohat
-- by illusion; karisyasi -- you will do; avasah -- involuntarily; api -- even; tat -- that.
TRANSLATION
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But, compelled by the work born of
your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of Kuntî.
Text 61
The Supreme Master resides in the heart of all living entities, o Arjuna, directing each creature subject to
the mechanical of time and matter.
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 6 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

îsvarah sarva-bhûtânâm
hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati
bhrâmayan sarva-bhûtâni
yantrârûdhâni mâyayâ

WORD FOR WORD
isvarah -- the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhutanam -- of all living entities; hrt-dese -- in the location of the
heart; arjuna -- O Arjuna; tisthati -- resides; bhramayan -- causing to travel; sarva-bhutani -- all living
entities; yantra -- on a machine; arudhani -- being placed; mayaya -- under the spell of material energy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living
entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy.
Text 62
Be sure to surrender in all respects unto Him, o son of Bharata; by His grace you will obtain the
transcendental abode of eternal peace.
SANSKRIT

tam eva saranam gaccha
sarva-bhâvena bhârata
tat-prasâdât parâm sântim
sthânam prâpsyasi sâsvatam
WORD FOR WORD
tam -- unto Him; eva -- certainly; saranam gaccha -- surrender; sarva-bhavena -- in all respects; bharata -O son of Bharata; tat-prasadat -- by His grace; param -- transcendental; santim -- peace; sthanam -- the
abode; prapsyasi -- you will get; sasvatam -- eternal.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain transcendental peace and the
supreme and eternal abode.
Text 63
Thus the greater secret of confidential knowledge has been explained by Me; in full consideration of this,
do that what you wish to do.
SANSKRIT

iti te jnânam âkhyâtam
guhyâd guhyataram mayâ
vimrsyaitad asesena
yathecchasi tathâ kuru
WORD FOR WORD
iti -- thus; te -- unto you; jñânam -- knowledge; akhyatam -- described; guhyat -- than confidential;
guhya-taram -- still more confidential; maya -- by Me; vimrsya -- deliberating; etat -- on this; asesena -fully; yatha -- as; icchasi -- you like; tatha -- that; kuru -- perform.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have explained to you knowledge still more confidential. Deliberate on this fully, and then do what
you wish to do.
Text 64
Hear once again from Me about this most confidential of supreme instruction; you are very dear to Me and
therefore I speak it to your benefit.
SANSKRIT

sarva-guhyatamam bhûyah
srnu me paramam vacah
isto 'si me drdham iti
tato vaksyâmi te hitam

WORD FOR WORD
sarva-guhya-tamam -- the most confidential of all; bhuyah -- again; srnu -- just hear; me -- from Me;
paramam -- the supreme; vacah -- instruction; istah asi -- you are dear; me -- to Me; drdham -- very; iti -thus; tatah -- therefore; vaksyami -- I am speaking; te -- for your; hitam -- benefit.
TRANSLATION
Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme instruction, the most confidential
knowledge of all. Hear this from Me, for it is for your benefit.
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 7 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 65
Thinking of Me becoming My devotee, offering your obeisances unto Me becoming My worshipper; for sure
you will come to Me in truth - this I promise you as You are dear to Me.
SANSKRIT

manmanâ bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yâjî mâm namaskuru
mâm evais'yasi satyam te
pratijâne priyo 'si me

WORD FOR WORD
mat-manah -- thinking of Me; bhava -- just become; mat-bhaktah -- My devotee; mat-yaji -- My
worshipper; mam -- unto Me; namaskuru -- offer your obeisances; mam -- unto Me; eva -- certainly; esyasi
-- you will come; satyam -- truly; te -- to you; pratijane -- I promise; priyah -- dear; asi -- you are; me -to Me.
TRANSLATION
Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come
to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend.
Text 66
Go, leave the variety of religions behind for surrendering to Me only; I will deliver you from all the
consequences of sin, don't worry!
SANSKRIT

sarva-dharmân parityajya
mâm ekam saranam vraja
aham tvâm sarva-pâpebhyo
moksayisyâmi mâ sucah

WORD FOR WORD
sarva-dharman -- all varieties of religion; parityajya -- abandoning; mam -- unto Me; ekam -- only;
saranam -- for surrender; vraja -- go; aham -- I; tvam -- you; sarva -- all; papebhyah -- from sinful
reactions; moksayisyami -- will deliver; ma -- do not; sucah -- worry.
TRANSLATION
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions.
Do not fear.
Text 67
This is never to be told by you to someone void of austerity, never at any time to a non-devotee, never to
one not willing to listen nor to anyone indignant towards Me.
SANSKRIT

idam te nâtapaskâya
nâbhaktâya kadâcana
na câsusrûsave vâcyam
na ca mâm yo 'bhyasûyati
WORD FOR WORD
idam -- this; te -- by you; na -- never; atapaskaya -- to one who is not austere; na -- never; abhaktaya -- to
one who is not a devotee; kadacana -- at any time; na -- never; ca -- also; asusrusave -- to one who is not
engaged in devotional service; vacyam -- to be spoken; na -- never; ca -- also; mam -- toward Me; yah -anyone who; abhyasuyati -- is envious.
TRANSLATION
This confidential knowledge may never be explained to those who are not austere, or devoted, or engaged
in devotional service, nor to one who is envious of Me.
Text 68
Anyone who explains this most confidential secret of Mine amongst the devotees is doing transcendental
devotional service unto Me and will without doubt for sure come to Me.
SANSKRIT

ya idam paramam guhyam
mad-bhaktesv abhidhâsyati
bhaktim mayi parâm krtvâ
mâm evais'yaty asamsayah
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 8 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yah -- anyone who; idam -- this; paramam -- most; guhyam -- confidential secret; mat -- of Mine; bhaktesu
-- amongst devotees; abhidhasyati -- explains; bhaktim -- devotional service; mayi -- unto Me; param -transcendental; krtva -- doing; mam -- unto Me; eva -- certainly; esyati -- comes; asamsayah -- without
doubt.
TRANSLATION
For one who explains this supreme secret to the devotees, pure devotional service is guaranteed, and at
the end he will come back to Me.
Text 69
Never is there anyone among men more dear to Me than him nor will also on earth another one become
more dear to Me than him.
SANSKRIT

na ca tasmân manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah
bhavitâ na ca me tasmâd
anyah priyataro bhuvi
WORD FOR WORD
na -- never; ca -- and; tasmat -- than him; manusyesu -- among men; kascit -- anyone; me -- to Me; priyakrt-tamah -- more dear; bhavita -- will become; na -- nor; ca -- and; me -- to Me; tasmat -- than him;
anyah -- another; priya-tarah -- dearer; bhuvi -- in this world.
TRANSLATION
There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear.
Text 70
He who will study this sacred conversation of ours; by him I will, by the sacrifice of spiritual knowledge,
be worshiped. Thus is My view.
SANSKRIT

adhyesyate ca ya imam
dharmyam samvâdam âvayoh
jnâna-yajnena tenâham
istah syâm iti me matih
WORD FOR WORD
adhyesyate -- will study; ca -- also; yah -- he who; imam -- this; dharmyam -- sacred; samvadam -conversation; avayoh -- of ours; jñâna -- of knowledge; yajnena -- by the sacrifice; tena -- by him; aham -I; istah -- worshiped; syam -- shall be; iti -- thus; me -- My; matih -- opinion.
TRANSLATION
And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation of ours worships Me by his intelligence.
Text 71
A man who with faith listens free from envy; also he being liberated, will attain to the auspicious of the
spheres of the pious.
SANSKRIT

sraddhâvân anasûyas ca
srnuyâd api yo narah
so 'pi muktah subhâl lokân
prâpnuyât punya-karmanâm
WORD FOR WORD
sraddha-van -- faithful; anasuyah -- not envious; ca -- and; srnuyat -- does hear; api -- certainly; yah -who; narah -- a man; sah -- he; api -- also; muktah -- being liberated; subhan -- the auspicious; lokan -planets; prapnuyat -- he attains; punya-karmanam -- of the pious.
TRANSLATION
And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful reactions and attains to the
auspicious planets where the pious dwell.
Text 72
O son of Prithâ, have you heard all this with a concentrated mind ? Has now the delusion brought about by
your lack in knowledge been dispelled, o conqueror of wealth?'
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 9 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

SANSKRIT

kaccid etac chrutam pârtha
tvayaikâgrena cetasâ
kaccid ajnâna-sammohah
pranastas te dhananjaya
WORD FOR WORD
kaccit -- whether; etat -- this; srutam -- heard; Prithâ-- O son of Prithâ; tvaya -- by you; eka-agrena -with full attention; cetasa -- by the mind; kaccit -- whether; ajñâna -- of ignorance; sammohah -- the
illusion; pranastah -- dispelled; te -- of you; dhananjaya -- O conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).
TRANSLATION
O son of Prithâ, O conqueror of wealth, have you heard this with an attentive mind? And are your
ignorance and illusions now dispelled?
Text 73
Arjuna said: 'My being mistaken is overcome, by Your mercy does it all come back to me. With all my
doubts removed , o infallible one, I am ready to put Your words into practice.'
SANSKRIT

arjuna uvâca
nasto mohah smrtir labdhâ
tvat-prasâdân mayâcyuta
sthito 'mi gata-sandehah
karisye vacanam tava

WORD FOR WORD
arjunah uvaca -- Arjuna said; nastah -- dispelled; mohah -- illusion; smrtih -- memory; labdha -- regained;
tvat-prasadat -- by Your mercy; maya -- by me; acyuta -- O infallible Krishna; sthitah -- situated; asmi -- I
am; gata -- removed; sandehah -- all doubts; karisye -- I shall execute; vacanam -- order; tava -- Your.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Krishna, O infallible one,
my illusion is now gone. I have regained my
memory by Your mercy. I am now firm and free
from doubt and am prepared to act according
to Your instructions.
Text 74
Sañjaya said: "Thus I have heard this discussion
of Vâsudeva and of the great soul Arjuna, so
wonderful, that it makes my hair stand on end.
SANSKRIT

sanjaya uvâca
ity aham vâsudevasya
pârthasya ca mahâtmanah
samvâdam imam asrausam
adbhutam roma-harsanam
WORD FOR WORD
sanjayah uvaca -- Sañjaya said; iti -- thus; aham
-- I; vasudevasya -- of Krishna; prthâsya -- and
Arjuna; ca -- also; maha-atmanah -- of the
great soul; samvadam -- discussion; imam -this; asrausam -- have heard; adbhutam -wonderful; roma-harsanam -- making the hair
stand on end.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya said: Thus have I heard the
conversation of two great souls, Krishna and
Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that
my hair is standing on end.

Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 10 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

Text 75
Through the grace of Vyâsadeva I have heard this confidential about the supreme of yoga directly from the
personal speaking of the master of yoga Krishna Himself.
SANSKRIT

vyâsa-prasâdâc chrutavân
etad guhyam aham param
yogam yogesvarât krsnât
sâksât kathayatah svayam

WORD FOR WORD
vyasa-prasadat -- by the mercy of Vyasadeva; srutavan -- have heard; etat -- this; guhyam -- confidential;
aham -- I; param -- the supreme; yogam -- mysticism; yoga-isvarat -- from the master of all mysticism;
krsnat -- from Krishna; saksat -- directly; kathayatah -- speaking; svayam -- personally.
TRANSLATION
By the mercy of Vyasa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly from the master of all
mysticism, Krishna, who was speaking personally to Arjuna.
Text 76
O King, over and over remembering this wonderful message so Holy of Kes'ava and Arjuna, delights me
time and again.
SANSKRIT

râjan samsmrtya samsmrtya
samvâdam imam adbhutam
kesavârjunayoh punyam
hrsyâmi ca muhur muhuh

WORD FOR WORD
rajan -- O King; samsmrtya -- remembering; samsmrtya -- remembering; samvadam -- message; imam -this; adbhutam -- wonderful; kesava -- of Lord Krishna; arjunayoh -- and Arjuna; punyam -- pious; hrsyami
-- I am taking pleasure; ca -- also; muhuh muhuh -- repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, I take
pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.
Text 77
And also each time remembering the most wonderful form of the Lord fills me with great wonder, o King,
and makes me rejoice again and again.
SANSKRIT

tac ca samsmrtya samsmrtya
rûpam aty-adbhutam hareh
vismayo me mahân râjan
hrsyâmi ca punah punah
WORD FOR WORD
tat -- that; ca -- also; samsmrtya -- remembering; samsmrtya -- remembering; rupam -- form; ati -greatly; adbhutam -- wonderful; hareh -- of Lord Krishna; vismayah -- wonder; me -- my; mahan -- great;
rajan -- O King; hrsyami -- I am enjoying; ca -- also; punah punah -- repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O King, as I remember the wonderful form of Lord Krishna, I am struck with wonder more and more, and I
rejoice again and again.
Text 78
I am convinced that wherever there is the Lord of Yoga Krishna and the son of Prithâ carrying the bow and
arrows, that there opulence, victory, great power and morality are assured."
SANSKRIT

yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra pârtho dhanur-dharah
tatra srîr vijayo bhûtir
dhruvâ nîtir matir mama
Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 11 of 12

The Bhagavad Gita

the original translation of Swami Prabhupâda

WORD FOR WORD
yatra -- where; yoga-isvarah -- the master of mysticism; krsnah -- Lord Krishna; yatra -- where; Prithâh -the son of Prithâ; dhanuh-dharah -- the carrier of the bow and arrow; tatra -- there; srih -- opulence;
vijayah -- victory; bhutih -- exceptional power; dhruva -- certain; nitih -- morality; matih mama -- my
opinion.
TRANSLATION
Wherever there is Krishna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer,
there will also certainly be opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.

Chapter 18b - The Yoga of liberation

…Page 12 of 12

