PRINCIPAL UPANISHADS 


Put into English by 

Shree Purohit Swami 

and 

W.B. Yeats 


FABER AND FABER LIMITED 
24 Russell Square 
London 



First published in April Mcmxxxvii 
by Faber and Faber Limited 
24 Russell Square London W. C. 1 
Second edition March Mcmxxxviii 
Reprinted Mcmlii 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Bradford and Dickens London W.C. 1 
6 All rights reserved 



Preface 


Incompetent to expound Indian philosophy, I shall 
illustrate sortie few things that have to be said from 
my own daily thoughts and contemporary poetry. 

Shree Purohit Swami has asked me to introduce 
what is twice as much his as mine, for he knows San- 
skrit and English, I but English. Before, after and dur- 
ing his nine years' pilgrimage round India he has sung 
in Sanskrit every morning the Awadhoota Geeta, at- 
tributed to DattHtreya, an ancient Sage to whom he 
pays particular devotion, and two Upanishads, the Sad- 
guru, his own composition, and the Milndookya; and 
perhaps at night to entertain or edify his hosts, songs of 
his own composition ; those in Marathi or Hindi among 
the unlearned, those in Sanskrit among the learned. 
Sanskrit has been a familiar speech, not changing from 
place to place, but always on his tongue. 

For some forty years my friend George Russell (A.E.) 
has quoted me passages from some Upanishad, and for 
those forty years I have said to myself — some day I will 
find out if he knows what he is talking about'. Between 
us existed from the beginning the antagonism that 
unites dear friends. More than once I asked him the 
name of some translator and even bought the book, but 
the most eminent scholars left me incredulous. Could 

7 



latinised words, hyphenated words ; could polyglot 
phrases, sedentary distortions of unnatural English: — 
'However many Gods in Thee, All-Know’er, adversely 
slay desires of a person' — could muddles, muddied 
by 'Lo! Verily' and 'Forsooth', represent what grass 
farmers sang thousands of years ago, what their de- 
scendants sing today? So when I met Shree Purohit 
Swami I proposed that we should go to India and 
make a translation that would read as though the 
original had been written in common English: 'To 
write well,' said Aristotle, 'express yourself like the 
common people, but think like a wise man', a favour- 
ite quotation of Lady Gregory's — I quote her diary 
from memory. Then when lack of health and money 
made India impossible we chose Majorca to escape tele- 
phones and foul weather, and there the work was done, 
not, as I had planned, in ease and leisure, but in the in- 
terstices left me by a long illness. Yet I am satisfied; I 
have escaped that polyglot, hyphenated, latinised, 
muddied muddle of distortion that froze belief. Can we 
believe or disbelieve until we have put our thought 
into a language wherein we are accustomed to express 
love and hate and all the shades between? When belief 
comes we stand up, walk up and down, laugh or swing 
an arm; a mathematician gets drunk ; finding that 
which is the prerogative of men of action. 

I have not worked to confound George Russell, 
though often saddened by the thought that I could not 
— he died some months ago — but to confound some- 



thing in myself. He expressed in his ceaseless vague 
preoccupation with the East a need and curiosity of our 
time,' Psychical research, which must some day deeply 
concern religious philosophy, for its evidences surround 
the pilgrim and the devotee though they never take 
the centre of the stage, has already proved the exist- 
ence of faculties that would, combined into one man, 
make of that man a miracle-working Yogi. More 
and more too does it seem to approach a main thought 
of the Upanishads. Continental investigators, who reject 
the spiritism of Lodge and Crookes, but accept their 
phenomena, postulate an individual self possessed of 
such power and knowledge that they seem at every 
moment about to identify it with that Self without 
limitation and sorrow, containing and contained by all, 
and to seek there not only the living but the dead. 

But our need and curiosity have no one source. Be- 
tween 1922 and 1925 English literature, wherever most 
intense, cast off its preoccupation with social problems 
and began to create myths like those of antiquity, and 
to ask the most profound questions. 1 recall poems by 
T. S. Eliot, Those Barren Leaves' by Aldous Huxley, 
where there is a Buddhistic hatred of life, or a hatred 
Schopenhauer did not so much find in as deduced 
from a Latin translation of a Persian translation of 
the Upanishads: certain poems — The Seven Days of 
the Sun', 'Matrix', The Mutations of the Phoenix', 
by W. J. Turner, by Dorothy Wellesley, by Herbert 
Read, which have displayed in myths, not. as might 

9 



some writer of my youth for the sake of romantic sug- 
gestion but urged by the most recent thought, the world 
emerging from the human mind. A still younger gener- 
ation has brought a more minute psychological curi- 
osity, suggesting an eye where a goldsmith's magnify- 
ing glass is screwed, to like preoccupations. 

In their pursuit of meaning, Day Lewis, MacNeice, 
Auden, Laura Riding have thrown off too much, as I 
think, the old metaphors, the sensuous tradition of the 
poets: 

'High on some mountain shelf 
Huddle the pitiless abstractions bald about the neck;' 

but have found, perhaps the more easily for that sacri- 
fice, a neighbourhood where some new Upanishad, 
some half-asiatic masterpiece, may start up amid our 
averted eyes. 

When I was young we talked much of tradition, and 
those emotional young men, Francis Thompson, Lionel 
Johnson, John Gray, found it in Christianity. But now 
that The Golden Bough has made Christianity look 
modern and fragmentary we study Confucius with 
Ezra Pound, or like T. S. Eliot find in Christianity a 
convenient symbolism for some older or newer thought, 
or say with Henry Airbubble, 'I am a member of the 
Church of England but not a Christian.' Shree Purohit 
SwSmi and I offer to some young man seeking, like 
Shakespeare, Dante, Milton, vast sentiments and gene- 
ralisations, the oldest philosophical compositions of the 
world, compositions, not writings, for they were sung 

10 



long before they were written down. European scholar- 
ship with many doubts has fixed their date, or the date 
of the most important, as a little before 600 B.c. when 
Buddha was born, but Indian scholarship prefers a far 
earlier date. Whatever the date, those forest Sages be- 
gan everything ; no fundamental problem of philosophy, 
nothing that has disturbed the schools to controversy, 
escaped their notice. 

It pleases me to fancy that when we turn towards the 
East, in or out of church, we are turning not less to the 
ancient west and north; the one fragment of pagan 
Irish philosophy come down, 'the Song of Amergin', 
seems Asiatic; that a system of thought like that of 
these books, though perhaps less perfectly organised, 
once overspread the world, as ours today; 1 that our 
genuflections discover in that East something ancestral 
in ourselves, something we must bring into the light 
before we can appease a religious instinct that for the 
first time in our civilisation demands the satisfaction of 
the whole man. 

Upanishad is doctrine or wisdom (literally 'At the feet 
of, meaning thereby 'At the feet of some Master'), the 
doctrine or wisdom of the Wedas. Each is attached to 
some section and sometimes is named from the section. 
The Katha-Upanishad for instance is part of the Kathak 

1 All Indian clerks in Government offices have just been or- 
dered to wear trousers, so at any rate declares a London mer- 
chant, an exporter to India, who has decided to specialise in 
trouser-stretchers. It follows the flag. 

11 



Brahman section in the Yajur-Weda. Shree Purohit 
Swami has omitted the usual first five chapters of the 
Chhand6gya-Upanishad because they are so intermixed 
with ritual that they are no longer studied, though still 
sung. For the same reason he has selected from Briha- 
dSranyaka-Upanishad such passages as contain no such 
intermixture. A few passages have been 'omitted, not 
because descriptions of ritual but because repetitions 
of what is said and said as well elsewhere. Their order 
wherein the Upanishads should be studied, according to 
tradition, is that in which they are printed in this book. 

W. B. YEATS. 


12 



Contents 


I., The Lord 15 

(Eesha-Upanishad) 

II.. At Whose Command? 19 

(Kena-Upanishad) 

III. From the Kathak Branch oftheWedas 25 

(Katha-Upanishad) 

IV. Questions 39 

(Prashna-Upanishad) 

V. At the Feet of the Monk 49 

(Mundaka-Upanishad) 

VI. At the Feet of Master Mandooka 59 
(Mandookya-Upanishad) 

VII. From the Taittireeya Branch of the 

Wedas (Taittireeya-Upanishad) 63 

VIII. At the Feet ofMaster Aitareya 79 

(Aitareya-Upanishad) 

IX. The Doctrine of the ChHandbgyas 85 
(Chhandogya-Upanishad) 

X. Famous Debates in the Forest 119 

(Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad) 


13 




The Lord 
(Eesha-Upanishad) 


That is perfect. This is perfect. Perfect comes from 
perfect. Take perfect from perfect, the remainder is 
perfect. 

May peace and peace and peace be everywhere. 

Whatever lives is full of the Lord. Claim nothing; 
enjoy, do not covet His property. 

Then hope for a hundred years of life doing your 
duty. No other way can prevent deeds from clinging, 
proud as you are of your human life. 

They that deny the Self, return after death to a god- 
less birth, blind, enveloped in darkness. 

The Self is one. Unmoving, it moves faster than the 
mind. The senses lag, but Self runs ahead. Unmoving, 
it outruns pursuit. Out of Self comes the breath that is 
the life of all things. 

Unmoving, it moves; is far away, yet near; within 
all, outside all. 

Of a certainty the man who can see all creatures in 
himself, himself in all creatures, knows no sorrow. 

15 



How can a wise man, knowing the unity of life, see- 
ing all creatures in himself, be deluded or sorrowful? 

The Self is everywhere, without a body, without a 
shape, whole, pure, wise, all knowing, far shining, self- 
depending, all transcending} in the eternal procession 
assigning to every period its proper duty. 

Pin your faith to natural knowledge, stumble 
through the darkness of the blind; pin your faith to 
supernatural knowledge, stumble through a darkness 
deeper still. 

Natural knowledge brings one result, supernatural 
knowledge another. We have heard it from the wise 
who have clearly explained it. 

They that know and can distinguish between natural 
knowledge and supernatural knowledge shall, by the 
first, cross the perishable in safety; shall, passing beyond 
the second, attain immortal life. 

Pin your faith to the seed of nature, stumble through 
the darkness of the blind; pin your faith to the shapes of 
nature, stumble through a darkness deeper still. 

The seed of nature brings one result; the shapes of 
nature another. We have heard it from the wise, who 
have clearly explained it . 

They that know and can distinguish between the 
shapes of nature and the seed of nature shall, by the first, 
cross the perishable in safety; shall, passing beyond the 
second, attain immortal life. 

They have put a golden stopper into the neck of 

16 



the bottle. Pull it. Lord! Let out reality. I am full of 
longing. 

Protector, Seer, controller of all, fountain of life, up- 
holder, do not waste light; gather light; let me see that 
blessed body — '-Lord of all. I myself am He. 

Life merge into the all prevalent, the eternal; body 
turn to ashes. Mind! meditate on the eternal Spirit; re- 
member past deeds. Mind! remember past deeds; re- 
member, Mind! remember. 

Holy light! illuminate the way that we may gather 
the good we planted. Are not our deeds known to you? 
Do not let us grow crooked, we that kneel and pray 
again and again. 


17 




n 

At Whose Command ? 
(Kena-Upanishad) 


i 

Speech, eyes, ears, limbs, life, energy, come to my 
help. These books have Spirit for theme. I shall never 
deny Spirit, nor Spirit deny me. Let me be in union, 
communion with Spirit. When I am one with Spirit, 
may the laws these books proclaim live in me, may the 
laws live. 

The enquirer asked: 'What has called my mind to 
the hunt? What has made my life begin? What wags in 
my tongue? What God has opened eye and ear?' 

The teacher answered: 'It lives in all that lives, 
hearing through the ear, thinking through the mind, 
speaking through the tongue, seeing through the eye. 
The wise man clings neither to this nor that, rises out 
of sense, attains immortal life. 

'Eye, tongue, cannot approach it nor mind know; 
not knowing, we cannot satisfy enquiry. It lies beyond 
the known, beyond the unknown. We know through 
those who have preached it, have learnt it from tradi- 
tion. 


19 



That which makes the tongue speak, but needs no 
tongue to explain, that alone is Spirit; not what sets the 
world by the ears. 

'That which makes the mind think, but needs no 
mind to think, that alone is Spirit; not, what sets the 
world by the ears. 

'That which makes the eye see, but needs no eye to 
see, that alone is Spirit; not what sets the world by the 
ears. 

'That which makes the ear hear, but needs no ear to 
hear, that alone is Spirit; not what sets the world by 
the ears. 

'That which makes life live, but; needs no life to live, 
that alone is Spirit; not what sets the world by the ears.' 

2 

'If you think that you know much, you know little. 
If you think that you know It from study of your own 
mind or of nature, study again.' 

The enquirer said: 'I do not think that I know much, 
I neither say that I know, nor say that I do not.' 

The teacher answered: 'The man who claims that he 
knows, knows nothing; but he who claims nothing, 
knows. 

'Who says that Spirit is not known, knows; who claims 
that he knows, knows nothing. The ignorant think that 
Spirit lies within knowledge, the wise man knows It 
beyond knowledge. 

'Spirit is known through revelation. It leads to free- 

20 



dom. It leads to power. Revelation is the conquest of 
death. 

'The living' man who finds Spirit, finds Truth. But if 
he fail, he sinks among fouler shapes. The man who 
can see the same Spirit in every creature, clings neither 
to this nor that, attains immortal life.' 

3 

Once upon a time, Spirit planned that the gods might 
win a great victory. The gods grew boastful ; though 
Spirit had planned their victory, they thought they had 
done it all. 

Spirit saw their vanity and appeared. They could not 
understand; they said: 'Who is that mysterious Per- 
son?' 

They said to Fire: 'Fire! Find out who is that mys- 
terious Person.' 

Fire ran to Spirit. Spirit asked what it was. Fire said: 
'I am Fire; known to all.' 

Spirit asked: 'What can you do?' Fire said: T can 
burn anything and everything in this world.' 

'Burn it,' said Spirit, putting a straw on the ground. 
Fire threw itself upon the straw, but could not burn it. 
Then Fire ran to the gods in a hurry and confessed it 
could not find out who was that mysterious Person. 

Then the gods asked Wind to find out who was that 
mysterious Person. 

Wind ran to Spirit and Spirit asked what it was. Wind 
said: 'I am Wind j I am the King of the Air,' 

21 



Spirit asked: 'What can you do?' and Wind said: 'I 
can blow away anything and everything in this world.' 

'Blow it away,' said Spirit, putting a straw on the 
ground. Wind threw itself upon the straw, but could 
not move it. Then Wind ran to the gods in a hurry and 
confessed it could not find out who was that mysterious 
Person. 

Then the gods went to Light and asked it to find 
out who was that mysterious Person. Light ran towards 
Spirit, but Spirit disappeared upon the instant. 

There appeared in the sky that pretty girl, the God- 
dess of Wisdom, snowy Himalaya's daughter. Light 
went to her and asked who was that mysterious Person. 

4 

The Goddess said: 'Spirit, through Spirit you at- 
tained your greatness. Praise the greatness of Spirit.' 
Then Light knew that the mysterious Person was none 
but Spirit. 

That is how these gods — Fire, Wind and Light — 
attained supremacy ; they came nearest to Spirit and 
were the first to call that Person Spirit. 

Light stands above Fire and Wind; because closer 
than they, it was the first to call that Person Spirit. 

This is the moral of the tale. In the lightning, in the 
light of an eye, the light belongs to Spirit. 

The power of the mind when it remembers and de- 
sires, when it thinks again and again, belongs to Spirit. 
Therefore let Mind meditate on Spirit. 

22 



Spirit is the Good in all. It should be worshipped as 
the -Good. He that knows it as the Good is esteemed by 
all. 

You asked me about spiritual knowledge, I have ex- 
plained it. 

Austerity, self-control, meditation are the founda- 
tion of this knowledge; the Wedas are its house, truth 
its shrine. 

He who knows this shall prevail against all evil, enjoy 
the Kingdom of Heaven, yes, for ever enjoy the blessed 
Kingdom of Heaven. 


23 




1 

From the Kathak Branch of 
the Wedas 

(Katha-Upanishad) 


Book I 

1 

May He protect us both. May He take pleasure in us 
both. May we show courage together. May spiritual 
knowledge shine before us. May we never hate one an- 
other. May peace and peace and peace be everywhere. 

WcSjashrawas, wanting heaven, gave away all his 
property. 

He had a son by name Nachiketas. While the gifts 
were passing, Nachiketas, though but a boy, thought to 
himself: 

'He has not earned much of a heaven; his cows can 
neither eat, drink, calve nor give milk.' 

He went to his father and said: 'Father, have you 
given me to somebody?' He repeated the question a 
second and a third time; at last his father said: '1 give 
you to Death.' 

Nachiketas thought: 'Whether 1 die now or later 

25 



matters little ; but what 1 would like to know is what 
happens if Death gets me now.' 

Wajashrawas would have taken back his words but 
Nachiketas said: 'Think of those who went before, 
those that will come after: their word their bond. Man 
dies and is born again like a blade of grass,' 

Nachiketas went into the forest and sat in meditation 
within the house of Death. When Death appeared his 
servant said: 'Lord! When a holy man enters a house as 
guest it is as if Fire entered. The wise man cools him 
down. So please give him water. 

'If a holy man comes into a fool's house and is given 
nothing, the fool's family, public and private life, am- 
bitions, reputation, property, hopes, alliances, all suffer.' 

Thereupon Death said to Nachiketas: 'A guest 
should be respected ; you have lived three days in my 
house without eating and drinking. 1 bow to you, holy 
man! Take from me three gifts and I shall be the better 
for it.' 

Nachiketas said: T will take as my first gift that 1 
may be reconciled to my father; that he may be happy; 
that he may keep no grudge against me but make me 
welcome.' 

Death said: 'I shall so arrange things, that when your 
father gets you back he shall sleep well at night, his 
grudge forgotten and love you as before.' 

Nachiketas said: 'There is no fear in the Kingdom of 
Heaven; becauseyou are not there, nobody there is afraid 
of old age; man is beyond hunger, thirst and sorrow. 

26 " 



' Death! you know what Fire leads to heaven, show it, 
1 am full of faith. I ask that Fire as my second gift,' 

Death said:' '1 will explain it, listen. Find the rock 
and conquer unmeasured worlds. Listen, for this came 
out of the cavern.' 

Death told him that out of Fire comes this world, 
what bricks and how many go to the altar, how best to 
build it. Nachiketas repeated all. Death encouraged 
ran on: 

'1 give you another gift. This Fire shall be called by 
your name. 

'Count the links of the chain: worship the triple 
Fire: knowledge, meditation, practice; the triple pro- 
cess: evidence, inference, experience; the triple duty: 
study, concentration, renunciation; understand that 
everything comes from Spirit, that Spirit alone is 
sought and found; attain everlasting peace; mount be- 
yond birth and death. 

'When man understands himself, understands uni- 
versal Self, the union of the two, kindles the triple Fire, 
offers the sacrifice; then shall he, though still on earth, 
break the bonds of death, beyond sorrow, mount into 
heaven. 

'This Fire that leads to heaven is your second gift, 
Nachiketas! It shall be named after you. Now choose 
again, choose the third gift.' 

Nachiketas said: 'Some say that when man dies he 
continues to exist, others that he does not. Explain, and 
that shall be my third gift.' 

27 



Death said: 'This question has been discussed by the 
gods, it is deep and difficult. Choose another gift, Nachi- 
ketas! Do not be hard. Do not compel mfe to explain,' 

Nachiketas said: 'Death! you say that the gods have 
discussed it, that it is deep and difficult; what explana- 
tion can be as good as yours? What gift compares with 
that?' 

Death said: 'Take sons and grandsons, all long-lived, 
cattle and horses, elephants and gold, take a great 
kingdom. 

'Anything but this; wealth, long life, Nachiketas! 
empire, anything whatever; satisfy the heart's desire. 

'Pleasures beyond human reach, fine women with 
carriages, their musical instruments; mount beyond 
dreams; enjoy. But do not ask what lies beyond death.' 

Nachiketas said: 'Destroyer of man! these things 
pass. Joy ends enjoyment, the longest life is short. Keep 
those horses, keep singing and dancing, keep it all for 
yourself. 

'Wealth cannot satisfy a man. If he but please you, 
Master of All, he can live as long as he likes, get all that 
he likes; but I will not change my gift. 

'What man, subject to death and decay, getting the 
chance of undecaying life, would still enjoy mere long 
life, thinking of copulation and beauty. 

'Say where man goes after death; end all that dis- 
cussion. This, which you have made so mysterious, is 
the only gift I will take.' 


28 



2 

Death said: 'The good is one, the pleasant another; 
both command the soul. Who follows the good, attains 
sanctity ; who follows the pleasant, drops out of the race. 

'Every man faces both. The mind of the wise man 
draws him to the good, the flesh of the fool drives him 
to the pleasant. 

'Nachiketas! Having examined the pleasures you 
have rejected them; turned from the vortex of life and 
death. 

'Diverging roads: one called ignorance, the other 
wisdom. Rejecting images of pleasure, Nachiketas! you 
turn towards wisdom. 

'Fools brag of their knowledge; proud, ignorant, dis- 
solving, blind led by the blind, staggering to and fro. 

'What can the money-maddened simpleton know of 
the future? "This is the only world" cries he; because 
he thinks there is no other I kill him again and again. 

'Some have never heard of the Self, some have heard 
but cannot find Him. Who finds Him is a world's won- 
der, who expounds Him is a world's wonder, who in- 
herits Him from his Master is a world's wonder. 

'No man of common mind can teach Him ; such men 
dispute one against another. But when the uncommon 
man speaks, dispute is over. Because the Self is a fine 
substance. He slips from the mind and deludes ima- 
gination. 

'Beloved! Logic brings no man to the Self. Yet when 
a wise man shows Him, He is found. Your longing eyes 

29 



are turned towards reality. Would that 1 had always 
suchapupil. 

'Because man cannot find the Eternal'through pass- 
ing pleasure, 1 have sought the Fire in these pleasures 
and, worshipping that alone, found the Eternal. 

'Nachiketas! The fulfilment of all desire, the con- 
quest of the world, freedom from fear, unlimited plea- 
sure, magical power, all were yours, but you renounced 
them all, brave and wise man. 

'The wise, meditating on God, concentrating their 
thought, discovering in the mouth of the cavern, deep- 
er in the cavern, that Self, that ancient Self, difficult 
to imagine, more difficult to understand, pass beyond 
joy and sorrow. 

The man that, hearing from the Teacher and com- 
prehending, distinguishes nature from the Self, goes to 
the source; that man attains joy, lives forever in that 
joy. 1 think, Nachiketas! your gates of joy stand open.' 

Nachiketas asked: 'What lies beyond right and wrong, 
beyond cause and effect, beyond past and future?' 

Death said: 'The word the Wedas extol, austerities 
proclaim, sanctities approach — that word is Om. 

'That word is eternal Spirit, eternal distance ; who 
knows it attains to his desire. 

'That word is the ultimate foundation. Who finds it 
is adored among the saints. 

'The Self knows all, is not born, does not die, is not 
the effect of any cause; is eternal, self-existent, im- 
Spelt A UM, pronounced as 'oam' in ’foam’. 

30 



perishable, ancient. How can the killing of the body 

kill Him? 

'He who thinks that He kills, he who thinks that 
He is killed, is ignorant. He does not kill nor is He 
killed. 

'The Self is lesser than the least, greater than the 
greatest. He lives in all hearts. When senses are at rest, 
free from desire, man finds Him and mounts beyond 
sorrow. 

'Though sitting, He travels ; though sleeping is every- 
where. Who but 1 Death can understand that God is 
beyond joy and sorrow. 

'Who knows the Self, bodiless among the embodied, 
unchanging among the changing, prevalent every- 
where, goes beyond sorrow. 

'The Self is not known through discourse, splitting 
of hairs, learning however great ; He comes to the man 
He loves; takes that man's body for His own. 

'The wicked man is restless, without concentration, 
without peace ; how can he find Him, whatever his 
learning? 

'He has made mere preachers and soldiers His food, 
death its condiment; how can a common man find Him?' 

3 

'The individual self and the universal Self, living in 
the heart, like shade and light, though beyond enjoy- 
ment, enjoy the result of action. All say this, all who 
know Spirit, whether householder or ascetic. 

31 



'Man can kindle that Fire, that Spirit, a bridge for 
all who sacrifice, a guide for all who pass beyond fear. 

'Self rides in the chariot of the body, intellect the 
firm-footed charioteer, discursive mind the reins. 

'Senses are the horses, objects of desire the roads. 
When Self is joined to body, mind, sense, none but He 
enjoys. 

'When a man lack steadiness, unable to control his 
mind, his senses are unmanageable horses. 

'But if he control his mind, a steady man, they are 
manageable horses. 

'The impure, self-willed, unsteady man misses the 
goal and is born again and again. 

'The self-controlled, steady, pure man goes to that 
goal from which he never returns. 

'He who calls intellect to manage the reins of his 
mind reaches the end of his journey, finds there all- 
pervading Spirit. 

'Above the senses are the objects of desire, above the 
objects of desire mind, above the mind intellect, above 
the intellect manifest nature. 

'Above manifest nature the unmanifest seed, above 
the unmanifest seed, God. God is the goal; beyond Him 
nothing. 

'God does not proclaim Himself, He is everybody's 
secret, but the intellect of the sage has found Him. 

'The wise man would lose his speech in mind, 
mind in the intellect, intellect in nature, nature in God 
and so find peace. 


32 



'Get up! Stir yourself! Learn wisdom at the Master's 
feet. A hard path the sages say, the sharp edge of a razor. 

'He who knows the soundless, odourless, tasteless, in- 
tangible, formless, deathless, supernatural, undecaying, 
beginningless, endless, unchangeable Reality, springs 
out of the mouth of Death.' 

Those who hear and repeat correctly this ancient 
dialogue between Death and Nachiketas are approved 
by holy men. 

He who sings this great mystery at the anniversary 
of his fathers to a rightly chosen company, finds good 
luck, good luck beyond measure. 


Book II 

l 

Death said: 'God made sense turn outward, man 
therefore looks outward, not into himself. Now and 
again a daring soul, desiring immortality, has looked 
back and found himself. 

The ignorant man runs after pleasure, sinks into 
the entanglements of death; but the wise man, 
seeking the undying, does not run among things 
that die. 

'He through whom we see, taste, smell, feel, hear, 
enjoy, knows everything. He is that Self. 

'The wise man by meditating upon the self-depend- 
ent, all-pervading Self, understands waking and sleep- 
ing and goes beyond sorrow, 
c 55 


Y.U. 



'Knowing that the individual self, eater of the fruit 
of action, is the universal Self, maker of past and future, 
he knows he has nothing to fear. 

'He knows that He himself born in the beginning 
out of meditation, before water was created, enters 
every heart and lives there among the elements. 

'That boundless Power, source of every power, mani- 
festing itself as life, entering every heart, living there 
among the elements, that is Self. 

'The Fire, hidden in the fire-stick like a child in the 
womb, worshipped with offerings, that Fire is Self. 

'He who makes the sun rise and set, to Whom all 
powers do homage, He that has no master, that is Self. 

'That which is here, is hereafter ; hereafter is here. 
He who thinks otherwise wanders from death to death. 

'Tell the mind that there is but One; he who divides 
the One, wanders from death to death. 

'When that Person in the heart, no bigger than a 
thumb, is known as maker of past and future, what 
more is there to fear? That is Self. 

'That Person, no bigger than a thumb, burning like 
flame without smoke, maker of past and future, the 
same today and tomorrow, that is Self. 

'As rain upon a mountain ridge runs down the slope, 
the man that has seen the shapes of Self runs after them 
everywhere. 

'The Self of the wise man remains pure; pure water, 
Nachiketas, poured into pure water.' 


34 



2 

'Who meditates on self-existent, pure intelligence, 
ruler of the body, the city of eleven gates, grieves no 
more, is free, for ever free. 

'He is sun in the sky, fire upon the altar, guest in the 
house, air that runs everywhere, Lord of lords, living 
in reality. He abounds everywhere, is renewed in the 
sacrifice, born in water, springs out of the soil, breaks 
out of the mountain ; power: reality. 

'Living at the centre, adorable, adored by the senses, 
He breathes out, breathes in. 

'When He, the bodiless, leaves the body, exhausts the 
body, what leaves? That is Self. 

'Man lives by more than breath ; he lives by the help 
of another who makes it come and go. 

'Nachiketas! 1 will tell you the secret of undying 
Spirit and what happens after death. 

'Some enter the womb, waiting for a moving body, 
some pass into unmoving things: according to deed and 
knowledge. 

'Who is awake, who creates lovely dreams, when 
man is lost in sleep? That Person through whom all 
things live, beyond whom none can go; pure, powerful, 
immortal Spirit. 

'As fire, though one, takes the shape of whatsoever it 
consumes, so the Self, though one, animating all things, 
takes the shape of whatsoever it animates ; yet stands 
outside. 

'As air, though one, takes the shape of whatsoever it 

35 



enters, so the Self, though one, animating all things, 
takes the shape of whatsoever it animates; yet stands 
outside. 

'As the sun, the eye of the world, is not touched by 
the impurity it looks upon, so the Self, though one, 
animating all things, is not moved by human misery 
but stands outside. 

'He is One, Governor, Self of all, Creator of many out 
of one. He that dare discover Him within, rejoices; 
what other dare rejoice? 

'He is imperishable among things that perish. Life of 
all life, He, though one, satisfies every man's desire. 
He that dare discover Him within, knows peace; what 
other dare know peace?' 

Nachiketas asked: 'Where shall I find that joy be- 
yond all words? Does He reflect another's light or shine 
of Himself?' 

Death replied: 'Neither sun, moon, stars, fire nor 
lightning lights Him. When He shines, everything be- 
gins to shine. Everything in the world reflects His 
light.' 


5 

'Eternal creation is a tree, with roots above, branches 
on the ground; pure eternal Spirit, living in all things 
and beyond whom none can go; that is Self. 

'Everything owes life and movement to Spirit. 
Spirit strikes terror, hangs like a thunderbolt overhead; 
find it, find immortality. 


36 



'Through terror of God fire burns, sun shines, rain 
pours, wind blows, death speeds. 

'Man, if he' fail to find Him before the body falls, 
must take another body. 

'Man, looking into the mirror of himself may know 
Spirit there as he knows light from shade ; but in the 
world of spirits It is known distorted as in a dream, in the 
choir of angels as though reflected on troubled water. 

'He who knows that the senses belong not to Spirit 
but to the elements, that they are born and die, grieves 
no more. 

'Mind is above sense, intellect above mind, nature 
above intellect, the unmanifest above nature. 

'Above the unmanifest is God, unconditioned, filling 
all things. He who finds Him enters immortal life, be- 
comes free. 

'No eye can see Him, nor has He a face that can be 
seen, yet through meditation and through discipline 
He can be found in the heart. He that finds Him enters 
immortal life. 

'When mind and sense are at rest, when the dis- 
crimination of intellect is finished, man comes to his 
final condition. 

'Yoga brings the constant control of sense. When 
that condition is reached the Yogi can do no wrong. 
Before it is reached Yoga seems union and again dis- 
union. 

'He cannot be known through discourse, nor found 
by the mind or the eye. He that believes in His exis- 

57 



tence finds Him. How can a man who does not so be- 
lieve find Him? 

'Go backward from effect to cause until you are com- 
pelled to believe in Him. Once you are so compelled, 
truth dawns. 

'When the desires of the heart are finished, man 
though still in the body is united to Spirit ; mortal be- 
comes immortal. 

'When the knot of the heart is cut, mortal becomes 
immortal. This is the law. 

'The heart has a hundred and one arteries; one of 
these — Sushumna— goes up into the head. He who 
climbs through it attains immortality; others drive him 
into the vortex. 

'God, the inmost Self, no bigger than a thumb, lives 
in the heart. Man should strip him of the body, as the 
arrow-maker strips the reed, that he may know Him as 
perpetual and pure; what can He be but perpetual and 
pure?' 

Then Nachiketas having learnt from Death this 
knowledge, learnt the method of meditation, rose 
above desire and death, found God: who does the like, 
finds Him. 


38 



IV 

Questions 

(Prashna-Upanishad) 


1 

May our ears hear the good. Lords! inspiration of 
sacrifice! May our eyes see the good. May we serve him 
with the whole strength of our body. May we, all our 
life, carry out his will. May peace and peace and peace 
be everywhere. 

Welcome to the Lord! 

Sukesha Bharadwaja, Satyakama Shaibya, Sour- 
yayanee Gargya, Kousalya Ashwalayana, Bhargawa 
Waidarbhee and Kabandhee Katyayana, students and 
devotees, brought their offerings and their faith to 
Sage Pippalada. 

The Sage said: 'Stay with me for a year, practise 
faith, austerity, continence; then ask what questions 
you like.' 

2 

At the end of a year Kabandhee Katyayana said: 
'Lord! Who created all things?' 

The Sage said: 'The Creator, His mind's eye on the 
world made a couple in meditation, life and matter, 
thinking they would do the rest. 

39 



'Sun is life, Moon matter; World moveable and 
immoveable is matter, all shape matter. 

'The sun looks into the east, then into the other 
quarters, then above and below, enlivening, lighting. 

'He, all-prevalent life, first shows himself as Light. 
Here is my authority: 

' "The wise know Him, the all pervading, all illumi- 
nating, all knowing, the One, upholder of all, and say 
that He rises as the sun that He may warm everything, 
go into everything, itsparticular life. " 

'The year is the Creator. There are two paths, the 
southern and the northern. Those that are content 
with alms-giving and ritual preferring the life of the 
family, go to their ancestors by the southern path, attain 
the lunar world and are born again. All there is matter. 

'But those who seek the Self through austerity, con- 
tinence, faith, knowledge, go by the northern path, 
attain the solar world. It is living, immortal, beyond 
fear; it is the goal. Once there, there is no return. It is 
the law. Here is my authority: 

' "Some call the sun our protector, with five seasons or 
feet, twelve moons or bodies, who lives beyond the sky 
and sends the rain. Others call Him the year, reckoner 
of time, who rides in the chariot of seven colours or 
seven horses, and of six wheels considering that the 
number of seasons." 

'The month too is the Creator, its bright half is life, 
its dark half matter. Wise men perform their rituals in 
the bright half; fools in the dark. 

40 



'The round of day and night is the Creator; day life, 
night matter. Those that couple with a woman by day, 
waste life ; those that couple by night, preserve it. 

'Food is the Creator. Food makes the seed; all things 
are from seed. 

'Those who obey God as Creator, get all that life and 
matter can give. Those who practise austerity, conti- 
nence, veracity go beyond these into Heaven. 

'They that are neither crooked, nor hypocritical, nor 
lying, go beyond into pure Heaven,' 


Bhargawa Waidarbnee asked: 'Lord! What powers 
have knit the body? What powers give it life? Which is 
the greatest?' 

The Sage said: 'The powers are: air, fire, water, 
earth, speech, mind, light, hearing. All these said aloud 
that they had knit the body. 

'Life, greater than these, said: you deceive your- 
selves. It is I alone, dividing myself into five streams, 
knit and enliven the body. But they would not be- 
lieve. 

'Life, to vindicate himself, rose as though he wanted 
to leave the body. But as he rose, others knew that they 
too must rise. When he returned they returned. As bees 
follow their queen when she goes out; return when she 
returns; speech, mind, light, hearing returned: they 
began to praise life. 

'Life burns in the fire, shines in the Sun. Rain, cloud, 

41 



air, earth, are life. Matter is life. All that has shape or 
no shape is life. Life is immortality. 

'Everything is fixed in life, as are spokes in the hub 
of a wheel — the three Wedas, all sacrifices, all soldiers, 
all priests. 

'Life, Lord of Creation, moving in the womb, there 
bringing yourself to birth, master of the five streams! 
All things offer you their tribute. 

'You carry the offerings to the gods and the fathers; 
even breath and sense your handiwork. 

'Life! Creator, Protector, Destroyer! Sun in heavenly 
circuit! Master of stars! 

'Pour down the rain, let all things find their food, 
thrive, rejoice. 

'Life itself! Purity itself! Fire itself, Eater, Master! 
All the world your food, Father in Heaven! 

'May your body be in our speech, hearing, sight, 
mind, make us lucky, and never forsake us. 

'May Life, Master of the three worlds, protect us as a 
mother protects her children. Grant us wisdom, grant 
usluck.' 

4 

Kousalya Ashwalayana asked.- 'Lord! when does life 
begin; how does it get into the body; how does it live 
there after dividing itself; how does it get out of the 
body; how does it support all that is outside, all that is 
inside?' 

The Sage said: 'You ask weighty questions; you dig 
into the root. Here is my answer: 

42 



'Life falls from Self as shadow falls from man. Life 
and Self are interwoven, but Life comes into the body 
that the desires of the mind may be satisfied. 

'As the king portions out his kingdom under different 
officials, life portions out .the body under five living 
streams. 

The organs of excretion and generation under the 
downward stream Apana ; eye, ear, where He lives 
himself under Prana, which passes out through mouth 
and nose ; the middle of the body under the equalising 
stream Samana, distributor of food, kindler of the seven 
flames. 

'Self lives in the heart. There are a hundred and one 
arteries, from every artery start one hundred veins, 
from every vein seventy-two thousand smaller veins - 
all these He has put under the diffusing stream 
Wyana. 

'Climbing through one of these the upward stream 
Udana leads the meritorious man to his reward ; the 
sinful man to his punishment; if his merit and demerit 
are mixed, back to the world. 

'Rising sun is the symbol of life; sun maintains Prana 
of the eye; earth draws down Apana; air, filler of all, 
maintains Samana; wind, Wyana. 

'Light maintains Udana. When that light is out, 
sense dissolves in mind, man is born again. 

'Udana united to the mind's desire at the moment of 
death, returns to Life, and Life, Udana lighting the 
way, brings the soul to whatever place it deserves. 

43 



'The man who knows this, knows the meaning of 
life; his children are never lost. Here is my authority: 

' "He who knows the source and power of Life, how it 
enters, where it lives, how it divides itself into five, how 
it is related to the Self, attains immortality ; yes, at- 
tains immortality . " ' 

5 

Souryayanee Gargya asked: 'Lord! Who in man's 
body wakes, sleeps, dreams, enjoys? On whom do these 
depend?' 

The Sage said: 'As the rays of the setting sun gather 
themselves up into his orb to come out again at sunrise, 
so the senses gather themselves up into the mind, mas- 
ter of them all. Therefore when a man does not hear, 
see, touch, smell, taste, speak, receive, give, move, en- 
joy, we say that he sleeps. 

'Only the living fires are then awake. The living fire 
Apana corresponds to the everlasting sacrificial Garha- 
patyafire of the householder; the living fire Wyana cor- 
responds to the sacrificial Anwarhapachan fire that 
faces south and the southern path; the living fire Prana, 
lit from the fire Apana, corresponds to the sacrificial 
Ahawaneeya, fire lit from the everlasting Garhapatya 
fire that faces east and the rising sun. 

'The living fire Samana is called the equalising fire, 
because it balances those oblations, the outgoing and 
the incoming breath. Mind is the sacrificer. The reward 
of the sacrifice is the living fire Udana, the deep sleep 
that again and again leads mind to Self. 

44 



'The dreaming mind enjoys its greatness. What it 
has seen it sees again; what it has heard it hears again; 
what it has enjoyed in different countries and climates 
it enjoys again. Whatever is seen, unseen, heard, un- 
heard, enjoyed, unenjoyed, real, unreal, here and 
there, it knows; it knows everything. 

'When mind is lost in the light of the Self, it dreams 
no more; still in the body it is lost in that happiness. 

'My son! All things fly to the Self, as birds fly to the 
tree for rest. 

'Earth, its quality of scent; water, its quality of taste; 
light, its quality of beauty; wind, its quality of touch; 
air, its quality of sound; eye, what it sees; ear, what it 
hears; nose, what it smells; tongue, what it tastes; skin, 
what it touches; voice, what it says; hands, what they 
handle; generation, what incites it; excretion, what is 
excreted; feet, what they tread upon; mind, what it 
imagines; intellect, what it discriminates; pride, what 
swells it; thought, what is thought; light, what is lit; 
life, what depends upon it; all these fly towards the Self. 

'This is the Self who sees, touches, hears, smells, 
tastes, thinks, discriminates, acts. The personal self and 
the ultimate imperishable, impersonal Self, are one. 

'My son! Who knows the impersonal Self, wherein 
the personal self, the living fires, senses, elements live, 
he knows all; lives in all. Here is my authority: 

' "He who finds the imperishable Being where the 
individual self, sense, vitality and elements live, he 
knows all; pervades all." ' 


45 



6 

Satyakama Shaibya asked: 'Lord! Where does the 
man go after his life, if he meditates on Om all his life?' 

The Sage said: 'Om is the conditioned and the un- 
conditioned Spirit. The wise man with its help alone 
attains the one or the other. 

'If he meditates on the syllable A alone he is soon 
born again on this earth. If he has chanted the Rig- 
Weda, he is born among men, a great, austere, self-con- 
trolled, God-fearing man. 

'If he meditates on the two syllables A and U, and 
has chanted the Yajur-Weda, he goes to the moon and, 
after enjoying its pleasure, returns to the earth again 
and again. 

'He who meditates on the three syllables A, U, M, as 
upon God, is joined to the light of the sun. Peeling his 
evil off, as the snake peels off its skin, he goes through 
that light, with the help of Sama-Weda chants, to the 
Kingdom of Heaven, to the God greater than the great- 
est of all creatures though living in our body. Here is 
my authority; 

'"If man meditates on the three syllables in separa- 
tion, it is the emblem of mortality ; but if he meditate 
upon all together, inseparable, interdependent, the 
three conditions, physical, mental, intellectual, reward 
him; he goes beyond mortality. 

' "Rig-Weda brings man to earth, Yajur-Weda sends 
him to the sky, but only the Seer knows the world 
which Sama-Weda brings. The wise man with the help 

46 



A 

of Om goes there, beyond decay, death, fear; attains 
peace.'" 

7 

Sukesha Bharadwaja said: 'Lord! 1 was asked this 
question by Hiranyanabha, Prince of Koasala: "Bharad- 
waja! Do you know God and his sixteen phases?" — I 
said to the young man: "I do not. I will not lie about it, 
for I know what happens to the liar. If I did, I would 
tell you." The Prince mounted his chariot, and went 
away without a word. Now I ask: "Where is that God?" ' 

The Sage said: 'My son, that God and his sixteen 
phases are in this body. 

'God thought to himself: "What is that which com- 
pels me to go if it goes, to stay if it stays?" 

'He then created life; from life, knowledge; from 
knowledge, air; from air, wind; from wind, light; 
from light, water; from water, earth; from earth, 
sense; from sense, mind; from mind, food; from food, 
vigour; from vigour, austerity; from austerity, revela- 
tion; fromrevelation, karma; fromkarma, world; from 
world, the names. 

'When rivers mingle with the sea they lose their 
names and shapes and people speak of the sea only, so 
these sixteen phases, when they mingle with God, lose 
their names and shapes and people speak of God only; 
man becomes the phaseless, the timeless. Here is my 
authority: 

' "God is the hub of the wheel where the sixteen 
phases are the spokes, know Him and die no more." 

47 



'What I have told you is all that is known about 
Spirit.' 

They worshipped the Sage and said: 'You are indeed 
our father. You have led us to the further shore. 

'All bow down to you, Great Sage! 

Bow down to the Great Sages!' 


48 



V 


At the Feet of the Monk 
(Mundaka-Upanishad) 


Book I 

1 

Lords, inspiration of sacrifice! May our ears hear the 
good. May our eyes see the good. May we serve Him 
with the whole strength of our body. May we, all our 
life, carry out His will. May peace and peace and peace 
be everywhere. 

The Creator came first ; He created Himself as Crea- 
torf then called Himself the Protector of the world. He 
gave the knowledge of Spirit, foundation of all know- 
ledge, to his eldest son Atharwa. 

Atharwa gave it to Angee; Angee to Satyawaha 
Bharadwaja; Satyawaha Bharadwaja to Angiras. 

That famous man the householder Shounaka said to 
Angiras: 'What is it that when known, makes us know 
everything in the world?' 

Angiras said: 'Those who know Spirit say that there 
are two kinds of knowledge, a lower and a higher. 

'The lower is the knowledge of the four Wedas and 
such things as pronunciation, ceremonial, grammar, 
D 4 9 Y.U. 



etymology, poetry, astronomy, The higher knowledge 
is the knowledge of the Everlasting; 

'Of that which has neither tangibility, nor ante- 
cedent, colour, eyes, ears, hands, feet; of that which is 
prevalent everywhere, immeasurably minute, self- 
evident, indestructible, always alive; of that which 
the wise name the Source. 

' As the web springs from the spider and is again with- 
drawn, as the plant springs from the soil, hairs from 
the body of man, so springs the world from the Ever- 
lasting. 

'Brooding Spirit creates food, food life, life mind, 
mind the elements, the elements the world, the world 
Karma, Karma the Everlasting. 

'He looks at all things; knows all things. All things, 
their nourishment, their names, their forms, are from 
His will, All that He has willed is right. ' 

2 

'The Sages studied the rituals described in the Wedas, 
went beyond them to the truth. You may find it better 
to stay with them ; if you seek the reward of your actions, 
stay with them. 

'When the sacrificial fire has been kindled, set it 
ablaze with butter, pour an oblation, then let the butter 
set it ablaze again. 

'If the worshipper does not offer his sacrifice, accord- 
ing to the rules, during the new moon, or full moon, or 
at the rainy season, or at harvest time, if he offer it 

50 



without regularity or at other seasons, or not at all, if 
he entertain no guests at the sacrifice, his people for 
seven generations shall be unlucky. 

'There are seven tongues of fire, the ruinous, the 
terrible, the swift, the smoky, the red, the bright, the 
flickering. 

'If the sacrifice has been made at the right time, the 
tongues, emblem of the solar rays, carry the devotee 
into paradise. 

' "Welcome! Welcome!" cry his pleasant flattering 
good deeds, as the tongues, emblem of the solar rays, 
carry him. "Look upon what we have made for you, 
look upon this beautiful paradise." 

'Those sacrifices with their crew of eighteen men, 
are unseaworthy ships, belong to a trivial karma. The 
fool fixes his hopes upon them; goes to wreck. 

'Fools brag of their knowledge, proud, ignorant, dis- 
solving; staggering to and fro, blind and led by the blind; 

'Dunces think, in their pride, that they have solved 
every problem; the passionate never learn. All these, 
the merit of their sacrifice exhausted, are thrust from 
paradise into the misery of life. 

'These dunces think ritual and alms are enough, 
they know nothing of the good itself; when ritual and 
alms have done their work, they fall into their old 
human life or it may be lower still. 

'The wise and the clean, content with what they get, 
living in solitude, practising austerities, go to the 
Deathless, through the gates of the sun. 

51 



'He that understands the results of action, wants to 
renounce them all. Activity cannot attain the Inactive; 
therefore, with hands folded, let him goto some teach- 
er who lives in Spirit and in whom revelation lives. 

To such a pupil, humble, master of mind and sense, 
the teacher can teach all he knows, bringing him to the 
Deathless.' 


Book II 

1 

'This is the truth: the sparks, though of one nature 
with the fire, leap from it; uncounted beings leap from 
the Everlasting, but these, my son, merge into It again. 

'The Everlasting is shapeless, birthless, breathless, 
mindless, above everything, outside everything, in- 
side everything. 

'From Him are born life, mind, sense, air, wind, 
water, earth that supports all. 

'He is the inmost Self of all. Fire, His head; sun and 
moon, His eyes; the four quarters, His ears; revelation, 
His voice; wind. His breath; world. His heart; earth, 
His feet. 

'Fire is from Him, its fuel sun, moon from sun, rain 
from moon, food from rain, man from food, seed from 
man; thus all descends from God. 

'From Him are hymns, holy chants, ritual, initiation, 
sacrifice, ceremonial, oblation, time, deeds, everything 
under sun and moon; 


52 



'From Him, gods, angels, men, cattle, birds, living 
fires, rice, barley, austerity, faith, truth, continence, 
law; 

'From Him seven senses like ritual fires, seven de- 
sires like flames, seven objects like oblations, seven 
pleasures like sacrifices, seven nerves like habitations, 
seven centres in the heart like hollows in the cavern. 

'From Him, seas, rivers, mountains, herbs and their 
properties: in the middle of the elements the inmost 
Self. 

'My son! There is nothing in this world, that is not 
God, He is action, purity; everlasting Spirit, Find Him 
in the cavern; knaw the knot of ignorance.' 

2 

'Shining, yet hidden, Spirit lives in the cavern. 
Everything that sways, breathes, opens, closes, lives in 
Spirit; beyond learning, beyond everything, better 
than anything; living, unliving. 

'It is the undying blazing Spirit, that seed of all 
seeds, wherein lay hidden the world and all its crea- 
tures. It is life, speech, mind, reality, immortality. It is 
there to be struck. Strike it, my son! 

'Take the bow of our sacred knowledge, lay against 
it the arrow of devotion, pull the string of concentra- 
tion, strike the target. 

A 

'Om is the bow, the personal self the arrow, imper- 
sonal Self the target. Aim accurately, sink therein. 

'Into His cloak are woven earth, mind, life, the 

53 



canopy, the Kingdom of Heaven. He is alone and sole; 
man's bridge to immortality. 

A 

'Come out of all the schools. Meditate upon Om as 
the Self. Remember He takes many shapes, lives in the 
. hub where the arteries meet; and may His blessing 
bring you out of the darkness. 

'He knows all, knows every particular. His glory pre- 
vails on earth, in heaven, in His own seat, the holy city 
of the heart. 

'He becomes mind and guides body and life. He lives 
in man's heart and eats man's food. He that knows Him, 
in finding joy, finds immortality. 

'He that knows Him as the shaped and the shape- 
less, cuts through the knot of his heart, solves every 
doubt, exhausts every action. 

'In a beautiful golden scabbard hides the stainless, 
indivisible, luminous Spirit. 

'Neither sun, moon, star, neither fire nor lightning, 
lights Him. When He shines, everything begins to 
shine. Everything in the world reflects His light. 

'Spirit is everywhere, upon the right, upon the left, 
above, below, behind, in front. What is the world but 

Spirit?' 


Book III 

l 

'Two birds, bound one to another in friendship, have 
made their homes on the same tree. One stares about 
him, one pecks at the sweet fruit. 

54 



'The personal self, weary of pecking here and there, 
sinks into dejection; but when he understands through 
meditation that the other — the impersonal Self — is in- 
deed Spirit, dejection disappears. 

'When the sage meets Spirit, phallus and what it 
enters, good and evil disappear, they are one. 

'The sage who knows Him as life and the giver of 
life, does not assert himself ; playing with Self, enjoying 
Self, doing his duty, he takes his rank. 

'The Self is found by veracity, purity, intelligence, 
continence. The ascetic, so purged, discovers His burn- 
ing light in the heart. 

'Falsehood turns from the way; truth goes all the 
way; the end of the way is truth; the way is paved with 
truth. The sage travels there without desire. 

'Truth lies beyond imagination, beyond paradise; 
great, smaller than the smallest; near, further than the 
furthest; hiding from the traveller in the cavern. 

'Nor can penance discover Him, nor ritual reveal, 
nor eye see, nor tongue speak; only in meditation 
can mind, grown pure and still, discover formless 
truth. 

'The Self shines out of the pure heart, when life 
enters with its five fires and fills the mind. 

'A pure man gets all he wants. A man with mind 
fixed upon some man who knows the Self, gets all he 
wants.' 


55 



2 

The daring man adores the knower of that Spirit, 
wherein the world lives and is bright; knows him es- 
caped from the seminal fluid. 

'He who desires one thing after another, brooding 
over them, is born where his desires can be satisfied; 
but the Self attained, one desire satisfied, all are satisfied. 

'The Self is not known through discourse, splitting 
of hairs, learning however great. He comes to the man 
He loves; takes that man's body as His own. 

'Blunderers, charlatans, weaklings, cannot attain 
the Self. He is found by the pure, daring, cautious 
man. 

.'He who has found Him, seeks no more; the riddle is * 
solved; desire gone, he is at peace. Having approached 
from everywhere that which is everywhere, whole, he 
passes into the Whole. 

'When the ascetic has mastered theory and practice, 
he forgets body, remembers Spirit, attains immortality. 

'His phases return to their source, his senses to their 
gods, his personal self and all his actions to the imper- 
sonal imperishable Self. 

'As rivers lose name and shape in the sea, wise men 
lose name and shape in God, glittering beyond all dis- 
tance. 

'He who has found Spirit, is Spirit. Nobody ignorant 
of Spirit is born into his family. He goes beyond sorrow, 
sin, death; the knots of his heart unloosed. 

'The Rig-Weda says "Tell this to those that know 

56 



the Wedas, do their duty, obey the law, make them- 
selves an oblation to the sole Fire. " 

'This is that ancient Truth,' sage Angiras declared. 
'Obey the law and understand,' 

We bow down to you, Great Sage! 

Bow down to you, Great Sages! 


57 




VI 


At the Feet of Master Mandooka 
(Mandookya-Upanishad) 


Lords! inspiration of sacrifice! May our ears hear the 
good. May our eyes see the good. May we serve Him 
with the whole strength of our body. May we, all our 
life, carry out His will. 

Peace, peace, and peace be everywhere. 

Welcome to the Lord! 

A 

The word Om is the Imperishable ; all this its mani- 

A 

festation. Past, present, future — everything is Om. 
Whatever transcends the three divisions of time, that 

A 

too is Om. 

There is nothing that is not Spirit. The personal self 
is the impersonal Spirit. It has four conditions. 

First comes the material condition — common to all 
— perception turned outward, seven agents , 1 nineteen 
agencies , 2 wherein the Self enjoys coarse matter. This 
is known as the waking condition. 

heavens (head), sun (eye), air (breath), fire (heart), water 
(belly), earth (feet), and space (body). 

2 Five organs of sense — hearing, touching, seeing, tasting and 

59 


The second is the mental condition, perception 
turned inward, seven agents, nineteen agencies, where- 
in the Self enjoys subtle matter. This is' known as the 
dreaming condition. 

In deep sleep man feels no desire, creates no dream. 
This undreaming sleep is the third condition, the in- 
tellectual condition. Because of his union with the Self 
and his unbroken knowledge of it, he is filled with joy, 
he knows his joy; his mind is illuminated. 

The Self is the lord of all; inhabitant of the hearts of 
all. He is the source of all; creator and dissoiver of 
beings. There is nothing He does not know. 

He is not knowable by perception, turned inward or 
outward, nor by both combined. He is neither that 
which is known, nor that which is not known, nor is 
He the sum of all that might be known. He cannot 
be seen, grasped, bargained with. He is undefinable, 
unthinkable, indescribable. 

The only proof of His existence is union with Him. 
The world disappears in Him. He is the peaceful, the 
good, the one without a second. This is the fourth con- 
dition of the Self — the most worthy of all. 

This Self, though beyond words, is that supreme 

A 

word Om; though indivisible, it can be divided in 

smelling; five organs of action — speaking, handling, walking, 
generating and excreting; five living fires — Prana, Ap3na, 
Wyhna, Udhna and Santana; Discursive mind (Manas), Dis- 
criminative mind (Buddhi), Mind-Material (Chitta) and Per- 
sonality (Ahangkara). 


60 



three letters corresponding to the three conditions of 
the Self, the letter A, 1 the letter U, and the letter M. 

The waking-condition, called the material condition, 
corresponds to the letter A, which leads the alphabet 
and breathes in all the other letters. He who under- 
stands, gets all he wants ; becomes a leader among men. 

The dreaming condition, called the mental condi- 
tion, corresponds to the second letter U. It upholds; 
stands between waking and sleeping. He who under- 
stands, upholds the tradition of spiritual knowledge 5 
looks upon everything with an impartial eye. No one 
ignorant of Spirit is born into his family. 

Undreaming sleep, called the intellectual condition, 
corresponds to the third letter, M. It weighs and unites. 
He who understands, weighs the world; rejects; unites 
himself with the cause. 

A 

The fourth condition of the Self corresponds to Om 
as One, indivisible Word. He is whole; beyond bargain. 
The world disappears in Him. He is the good; the one 
without a second. Thus Om is nothing but Self. He who 
understands, with the help of his personal self, merges 
himself into the impersonal Self; He who understands. 

''A' is pronounced short like the sound of V in 'her', 'U' as in 
'put', and 'M' as 'Me' in 'Merchant'. 


61 




VII 

From the Taittireeya Branch 
of the Wedas 
(Taittireeya-Upanishad) 


Book I 

Admonition 

1 

May the Sun bless us! May the Night bless us! May 
the Eye bless us! May Might bless us! May Speech bless 
us! May the All-prevalent bless us! Welcome Spirit! 
Welcome Life, Face of Spirit! Truth shall be on my 
lips and truth in my thoughts. May truth protect me; 
protect my teacher; protect us both. May peace and 
peace and peace be everywhere . 

2 

We explain what constitutes pronunciation. It com- 
prises letters, accent, quantity, articulation, rhythm, 
and lastly sequence of letters. 

3 

Grant success! Grant that we may be one in the light 
of Spirit! 


65 



This chapter deals with the world, heavenly bodies, 
education, generation, language. 

What is this world? Earth below, heaven above, air 
between, wind joining them. 

What are the heavenly bodies? Fire on one side, sun 
on the other side, water between, lightning joining 
them. 

What is education? The teacher on one side, pupil on 
the other side, knowledge between, discourse joining 
them. 

What is generation? Mother on one side, father on 
the other side, child between, procreation joining them. 

What is language? The lower jaw on one side, the 
upper jaw on the other side, words between, tongue 
joining them. 

This is the summary. He who knows them all, shall 
have children, cattle, food, knowledge, heaven. 

4 

A 

Om! Essence of the Wedas, revealed in the Wedas, 
revealed in the world, sprung from immortality! Lord, 
fill me with intelligence, that I may grasp immortality! 

Make my body strong, my tongue sweet, my ears 
keen. You are the Spirit's armour, hidden by sensual- 
ity. Keep me from forgetting. 

May spiritual riches come of their own will. May 
they increase, then send me Spirit itself. May I never 
lack clothes, cows, food, drink, that I may serve you 
the better. May pupils come, may pupils gather round, 

64 



may pupils listen, that I may serve you the better. May 
they in peace, control mind and sense, that they may 
serve you the better. 

May I become famous, may I become richer than the 
richest, that I may serve you the better. 

Lord! may I enter into you, may you enter into me! 
may I merge into your thousands of shapes, for my 
purification. 

As water flows downward, as months mingle with 
the year, Guardian! may pupils come from everywhere, 
that I may serve you the better. 

You are the Fold. Take me. Enlighten me. 

5 

Bhoohu, Bhuwaha, Suwaha, are sacred sounds. Sage 
Mahachamasya taught a fourth, Mahes, meaning 
Spirit, meaning God. The others are His limbs. 

When Bhoohu is earth, Bhuwaha sky, Suwaha 
heaven, Mahas is the sun; for everything is sustained 
by the sun. 

When Bhoohu is fire, Bhuwaha wind, Suwaha sun, 
Mahas is the moon; for planets are sustained by the 
moon. 

When Bhoohu is Rig-Weda, Bhuwaha Sama-Weda, 
Suwaha Yajur-Weda, Mahas is Spirit; for the Wedas 
are sustained by Spirit. 

When Bhoohu is Prana, Bhuwaha Apana, Suwaha 
VVyana, Mahas is Food; for the living fires are sustained 
by food. 

E 


65 


Y.U. 



Thus there are four times four, sixteen sacred 
sounds. He who knows them, knows Spirit; all gods 
will pay him homage. 


6 

God lives in the hollow of the heart, filling it with 
immortality, light, intelligence. 

Where the skull divides and where it is customary to 
divide the hair, lies the hollow, where the gate of God 
swings, like the uvula within the palate. 

Through that gate man goes forth into fire crying 
Bhoohu, into air crying Bhuwaha, into sun crying 
Suwaha, into Spirit crying Mahas. 

In Spirit, he attains heaven, conquers his mind ; be- 
comes master of speech, sight, hearing, knowledge. 

He becomes Spirit itself, which has for its body air, 
for its soul truth, forks rest life; there he is peaceful, 
merry, immortal. 

Worship Spirit, now that you are fit to worship an- 
cient Spirit. 


7 

Earth, sky, heavens, quarters, sub-quarters; fire, 
wind, sun, moon, stars; water, air, herb, food, body; 
are elements. 

Prana, Wyana, Apana, Udana, Santana; eye, ear, 
mind, tongue, touch; skin, flesh, muscle, bone, mar- 
row; are the body. 

A Sage said, understanding these sets of five: 'Every- 

66 



thing is sacred; for with the help of the latter, man con- 
quers the former.' 


8 

A 

Om is Spirit. Everything is but 6m. 

A A A 

Om permits, Om gives the signal. Om begins the 
ceremony. All chants begin with Om. All hymns begin 

A A 

with Om. The priest begins with Om. His commands 
are in the name of Om. The sacrificer offers the obla- 

A A 

tion with Om. The teacher begins with Om. The pupil 
begins with Om, 

A 

The pupil murmuring Om seeks for Spirit; in the 
end he finds Spirit. 


9 

Do your duty; learn and teach. Speak truth; learn and 
teach. Meditate; learn and teach. Control sense; learn 
and teach. Control mind; learn and teach. Kindle fire; 
learn and teach. Feed fire; learn and teach. Be hospit- 
able; learn and teach. Be humane; learn and teach. 
Serve the family; learn and teach. Procreate; learn and 
teach. Educate your children; learn and teach. 

Ratheetara Satyawacha says: 'Truth is necessary.' 

Paurushishti Taponitya says: 'Austerity is necessary.' 

Moudgalya Naka says: 'Learning and teaching are 
necessary.' 

Learning and teaching, they are austerity; they are 
austerity. 


67 



10 

'I nourish the tree of life. My glory is like the moun- 
tain peak. I am exalted, wise, luminous, immortal, 
pure. I am the life that flows from the sun.' So said 
sage Trishanku, having attained. 

11 

After teaching the Wedas, teacher says to pupil: 
'Speak the truth. Do your duty. Study the Wedas. Give 
what is fitting to the teacher; marry, continue the 
family. Neither neglect your spiritual nor your worldly 
welfare. Always learn and teach. Forget neither God 
nor ancestor. Your mother your goddess, your father 
your God, your guest your God, your teacher your God; 
copy our good deeds alone, so escape blame. 

'Look for men greater than us, welcome them, give 
them hospitality. 

'Give with faith; ifyou lack faith, give nothing. Give 
in proportion to your means. Give with courtesy. Give 
as the God-fearing give. Give to the deserving. 

'If you do not know what to do in some particular 
case or in your general conduct, think of what sense of 
duty, what kindness, independence of public opinion, 
some holy men of your neighbourhood, whether of an 
order or not, would show in like circumstance; if you do 
not know what to think about a man think what some 
such holy man would think about him. 

'This is the admonition, the advice, the law of the 
Wedas. Obey! Obey.' 


68 



Book II 
Joy 

May He protect us both. May He take pleasure in us 
both. May we show courage together. May Spiritual 
knowledge shine before us. May we never hate one 
another. 

May peace and peace and peace be everywhere. 

1 

He who knows Spirit knows the foundation. Here is 
my authority: 'He who knows Spirit as that boundless 
wise reality, hidden in the heart's cavern, gets all that 
he wants.' 

Out of Spirit came air, out of air, wind; out of wind, 
fire; out of fire, water; out of water, earth; out of earth, 
vegetation; out of vegetation, food; out of food, man; 

Man's elemental Self comes from food: this his head; 
this his right arm; this his left arm; this his heart; 
these legs his foundation. Here is my authority: 

2 

'From food are born all creatures; they live upon 
food, they are dissolved in food. Food is the chief of all 
things, the universal medicine. 

'They who think of food as Spirit, shall never lack. 
From food all beings are born, all beings increase their 
bulk; all beings feed upon it, it feeds upon all beings.' 

69 



The elemental Self is from food, but within it lives 
its complement and completion, the living Self. The 
living Self grows up side by side with the elemental 
Self. Prana is its head. Wyana its right arm. Apana its 
left arm. air its heart, earth its foundation. Here is my 
authority: 

5 

'Gods, men, beasts, live by breath. Breath is life and 
is called the giver of Life.' 

The living Self is the soul of the elemental Self, but 
within it lives its complement and completion, the 
thinking Self. The thinking Self grows up side by side 
with the living Self. Meditation is its head, ritual its 
right arm. prayer its left arm. admonition of the Wedas 
its heart, Sage Atharwangiras its foundation. Here is 
my authority: 

4 

'He who knows the spiritual joy mind cannot grasp 
nor tongue speak, fears nothing.' 

The thinking Self is the soul of the living Self, but 
within it lives its complement and completion, the 
knowing Self. The knowing Self grows up side by side 
with the thinking Self. Faith is its head, right its 
right arm. truth its left arm, concentration its heart, 
discrimination its foundation. Here is my authority: 


70 



5 

'Knowledge runs to sacrifice and incites action. Gods 
worship knowledge as the highest expression of Spirit. 
The steadfast worshipper of Spirit, as knowledge, goes 
beyond all evil, gets everything he Wants.' 

The knowing Self is the soul of the thinking Self, 
but within it lives its complement and completion, the 
joyous Self. The joyous Self grows up side by side with 
the knowing Self. Satisfied desire is its head, pleasure 
its right arm, contentment its left arm, joy its heart, 
Spirit its foundation. Here is my authority: 

6 

'He who denies Spirit, denies himself; he who affirms 
it, affirms himself.' 

This joyous Self is the soul of the knowing Self. 

Does an ignorant man attain Spirit after death or 
only a wise man? 


7 

God thought: 'I would be many; I will procreate.' 
And in the heat of his meditation created everything; 
creating everything He entered into everything; en- 
tering into everything He took shape yet remained 
shapeless; took lfmits yet remained limitless; made his 
home, yet remained homeless; created knowledge and 
ignorance; reality, unreality; became everything; there- 
fore everything is reality. Here is my authority: 

'In the beginning there was no creation; then crea- 

n 



tion came. He created Himself, out of Himself. Hence 
He is called Self-Creator.' 

Everything is Self-created. He is that essence. 
Drinking that essence, man rejoices. If man did not 
lose himself in that joy, he could not breathe} he could 
not live. Self is the sole giver of joy. 

When man finds invisible, nameless, homeless, 
shapeless, invulnerable rock, he is no longer terrified. 
To doubt Spirit is to live in terror. For that man, 
thinking himself wise, who doubts Spirit, Spirit be- 
comes terror itself. Here is my authority: 

'Through terror of God, sun shines, rain pours, fire 
burns, wind blows, death speeds. ' 

8 

What is joy? 

Think of a young man, well read, ambitious, firm, 
strong, noble; give him all the wealth of the world, call 
him one unit of human joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of those brought to the celestial choir by 
their good deeds. A man full of revelation, but without 
desire, has equal joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of choir-born spirits, A man full of re- 
velation, but without desire, has equal joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of the fathers, living in their eternal 
paradise. A man full of revelation, but without desire, 
has equal joy. 


72 



Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of heaven-born gods. A man full of re- 
velation, but without desire, has equal joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of gods brought to godhead by their 
good deeds. A man full of revelation, but without de- 
sire, has equal joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of ruling gods. A man full of revelation, 
but without desire, has equal joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of Indra, god of Power. A man full of 
revelation, but without desire, has equal joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of Brihaspati, who has taught the gods. 
A man full of revelation, but without desire, has equal 

joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of Prajapati, maker of gods. A man full 
of revelation, but without desire, has equal joy. 

Multiply that joy a hundred times, and call it one 
unit of the joy of Spirit. A man full of revelation, but 
without desire, has equal joy. 

He who lives in man, He who lives in the sun, are 
one. 

He who knows this, cries goodbye to the world 5 goes 
beyond elemental Self, living Self, thinking Self, know- 
ing Self, joyous Self. Here is my authority: 


75 



9 

'He who knows the spiritual joy mind cannot grasp 
nor tongue speak, fears nothing.' 

Should he do wrong, or leave good undone, he knows 
no remorse. What he does, what he does not, is sancti- 
fied ; what he does not, what he does, is sanctified. 


Book III 
Bhrigu 

May He protect us both. May He take pleasure in us 
both. May we show courage together. May spiritual 
knowledge shine before us. May we never hate one 
another. 

May peace and peace and peace be everywhere. 

1 

Bhrigu, seeking his father Waruna, said: 

'Lord! what is Spirit?' 

Waruna said: 'First know food, life, seeing, hearing, 
speaking, thinking; then that Spirit from whom all 
things are born, by whom they live, towards whom 
they move, into whom they return.' 

2 

Bhrigu meditated and found that food is Spirit. From 
food all things are born, by food they live, towards food 
they move, into food they return. 

74 



Having found this he said to his father: 'Lord! Tell 
me more about Spirit.' 

Waruna said:- 'Find Spirit through meditation; medi- 
tation is Spirit,' 


5 

Bhrigu meditated and found that life is Spirit. From 
life all things are born, by life they live, towards life 
they move, into life they return. 

Having found this he said to his father: 'Lord! Tell 
me more about Spirit.' 

Waruna said: 'Find Spirit through meditation, medi- 
tation is Spirit.' 

4 

Bhrigu meditated and found that mind is Spirit. 
From mind all things are born, by mind they live, to- 
wards mind they move, into mind they return. 

Having found this he said to his father: 'Lord! Tell 
me more about Spirit.' 

Waruna said: 'Find Spirit through meditation; medi- 
tation is Spirit.' 


5 

Bhrigu meditated and found that knowledge is 
Spirit. From knowledge all things are born, by know- 
ledge they live, towards knowledge they move, into 
knowledge they return. 

Having found this he said to his father: 'Lord! Tell 
me more about Spirit.' 


75 



Warunasaid: 'Find Spirit through meditation; medi- 
tation is Spirit.' 

6 

Bhrigu meditated and found that joy is Spirit. From 
joy all things are born, by joy they live, toward joy 
they move, into joy they return. 

This is what Bhrigu, son of Waruna, found in the 
hollow of his heart. 

He who knows it stands on a rock; commands every- 
thing, enjoys everything; founds a family, gathers 
flocks and herds; grows famous through the light of 
Spirit; is a great man, 


7 

Respect food. Life is food; body lives on food. Body 
is life; life is body; they are food to one another. 

He who knows it stands on a rock; commands every- 
thing, enjoys everything; founds a family, gathers 
flocks and herds; grows famous through the light of 
Spirit; is a great man. 


8 

Do not steal food. Water is food; light lives on water. 
Water is light; light is water; they are food for one 
another. 

He who knows it stands on a rock; commands every- 
thing, enjoys everything; founds a family, gathers 
flocks and herds; grows famous through the light of 
Spirit; is a great man. 


76 



9 

Store food. Earth is food; air lives on earth. Earth is 
air; air is earth; they are food for one another. 

He who knows it stands on a rock; commands every- 
thing, enjoys everything; founds a family, gathers 
flocks and herds; grows famous through the light of 
Spirit; is a great man. 

10 

Never turn anyone from the door; gather enough 
food, say to the stranger: 'Sir, the dinner is served.' He 
who gives with purity, gets purity in return; he who 
gives with passion, gets passion in return; he who gives 
with ignorance, gets ignorance in return. 

He who knows, meditates upon Spirit as the blessed- 
ness of speech; as Prana and Apana, the getting and 
giving of the two breaths; as the activity of hands, as 
movement of feet, as the evacuation of the bowels. 

These are the customary meditations upon the body. 
He meditates upon Spirit as nourishment in rain, as 
violence in lightning, as abundance in cattle, as light in 
stars, as creation, joy, immortality in sex, as all-filling, 
all-containing nature in air. 

These are the customary meditations on Nature. 
Worship Spirit as the support, be supported; worship 
Spirit as the great, become great; worship Spirit as the 
mind, become mind. 

Bow down to Spirit as the sole object of desire, be the 
goal of all desire; worship Spirit as the master of all, 
become the master of all. 


77 



Worship Spirit as the destroyer, your enemies whe- 
ther public or in your own house shall be destroyed. 

He who lives in man. He who lives in the sun, are the 
same. 

He who knows this, says goodbye to the world: goes 
beyond elemental Self, living Self, thinking Self, know- 
ing Self, joyous Self. 

He moves at will throughout the world, enjoying 
whatever he will, creating whatever shape he will, 
praising the unity of Spirit — miraculous, miraculous, 
miraculous. 

I am the food, I am the food, I am the food ; I am the 
eater, I am the eater, I am the eater j I am the link be- 
tween, I am the link between, I am the link between. 

I am the first among the visible and the invisible. I 
existed before the gods. I am the navel of immortality. 
Who gives me, protects me. I am food; who refuses to 
give me, I eat as food. 

I am this world and I eat this world. Who knows this, 
knows. 


78 



VIII 


At the Feet of Master Aitareya 
(Aitareya-Upanishad) 


1 

May God be revealed; speech merge in mind; mind 
merge in speech. May they bring me the Wedas. May 
I ponder over that knowledge day and night, may I 
never forget it. Truth shall be on my lips, and truth in 
my thoughts. May truth protect me; protect my teacher; 
protect us both. 

May peace and peace and peace be everywhere. 


2 

There was in the beginning one sole Self; no eye 
winked. He thought: 'Shall I create territories?' 

He created territories: that of the first water, that of 
light, that of earth, that of water. Heaven and beyond 
heaven is that of the first water; sky is that of light; 
this mortal territory is that of earth; under earth is that 
of water. He thought again: 'The territories are there; 
let me create their rulers,' Out of water he lifted an 


e warmed it, and because of His warmth a being with 


79 



a mouth appeared through a crack, for His own form 
lay within it. From the mouth came speech ; from speech 
fire. A nose appeared; from its nostrils came breath, 
from breath air. The eyes appeared; from the eyes came 
sight; from sight the sun. The ears appeared; from the 
ears came hearing; from hearing the four quarters. 
The skin appeared; from the skin came hair; from hair 
vegetation. The heart appeared; from the heart came 
the mind; from the mind came the moon. The navel 
appeared; from the navel came the downward breath 
Apana; from Ap”ana death. Sex appeared; from sex came 
seed; from seed water. 


5 

When these gods were created, they went back into 
the waters. Then He endowed that being with hunger 
and thirst. Then the gods said: 'Give us some place 
where we can live and eat.' 

He created ahull out of the waters. They said: 'No; 
it is not sufficient.' He created a horse. They said: 'No; 
it is not sufficient.' 

He created a man. They said: 'You have done well.' 
Because they were satisfied, man is the chief of crea- 
tures. He said to the gods: 'Take your places.' 

Fire in the character of speech entered the mouth; 
air in the character of scent entered the nose; sun in 
the character of sight entered the eyes; four quarters 
in the character of hearing entered the ears; vegeta- 
tion in the character of hair entered the skin; moon 

80 



in the character of mind entered the heart; death in 
the character of Apana entered the navel ; water in the 
character of seed entered the loins. 

Hunger and thirst said; 'Where is our place?' He said: 
'Take your place beside all the gods, for I have made 
you the partners of all. To whatever god man makes 
oblation, hunger and thirst shall partake.' 

4 

He thought: 'Here are the territories and their 
rulers. I will create food.' 

He meditated on water, and from the heat of medi- 
tation came an image. That image is food. 

Food fled from man. Man tried to grasp it with 
speech but failed ; had he succeeded, to talk about it had 
been satisfaction enough. 

He tried to grasp it with breath but failed; had he 
succeeded, to inhale it had been satisfaction enough. 

He tried to grasp it with his eyes but failed ; had he 
succeeded, to look upon it had been satisfaction enough. 

He tried to grasp it with his ears but failed 5 had he 
succeeded, to hear it had been satisfaction enough. 

He tried to grasp it with his skin but failed ; had he 
succeeded, to touch it had been satisfaction enough. 

He tried to grasp it with his mind but failed; had he 
succeeded, thinking of it had been satisfaction enough. 

He tried to grasp it with the downward breath 
Apana and succeeded. Apana alone receives food; 
Apana lives on food. 

F 


81 


Y.U. 



God thought: 'Can they live without me? How shall 
1 enter the body?' He knew that even if tongue spoke, 
breath breathed, eyes saw, ears heard, skin touched, 
mind thought, ApSna drew in, sex threw out, they 
would not know Him. 

He opened the suture of the skull, entered through 
the gate which is called the Gate of Joy. He found three 
places in the body where He could live, three conditions 
where He could move; waking, dreaming, sleeping. 

He entered the body, named its various parts, won- 
dered if there could be anything there not Himself, re- 
joiced to find there was nothing but Himself. 

Hence He is known by the name Idandra — He that 
sees — or it is shortened into Indra ; for even the gods 
are affectionate. 

5 

First He becomes the seed of a man, which is light 
gathered from all the limbs of the body. Man nourishes 
himself within himself as seed. When he ejects that 
seed into a woman, he himself is born. That is his first 
incarnation. 

The seed merges in the woman's body; because it 
becomes her body, it does not harm her. She nourishes 
the self of the man within herself. 

Protect her, for she is protecting the seed. Before and 
after the birth of the child, man blesses the child, 
blessing himself. Man lives in his child; that is his 
second incarnation. 

The son being the father over again, carries the tra- 

82 



ditions of the family, and the father having completed 
his fate, exhausted his years, dies and is born again. 
That is his third incarnation. 

Sage Wamadewa said: 'When lying in the womb, I 
understood how the gods worked. They put me into 
that iron-gated, hundred-gated, prison 5 but I fled 
quickly51 fledlike ahawk.' 

Sage Wa"madewa, broke out of the body, did all that 
he desired, attained the Kingdom of Heaven, became 
immortal; yes, became immortal. 

6 

'On whom should we meditate as the Self? Which of 
the two is He? Is He that by which we see, hear, speak, 
smell, separate the sweet from the sour? 

'Or is He that other, living in the mind or in the in- 
tellect as imagination, discrimination, knowledge, con- 
tinuity, intuition, conviction, contemplation, will, emo- 
tion, memory, desire, resolution, being, living, loving, 
longing; all names for the one Intelligence?' 

He is Spirit, Creator, God; all gods; earth, air, water, 
wind, fire, constituents of life, all greater and lesser 
combinations; seminal, egg-born, womb-born, sweat- 
born, soil-born; horses, cows, men, elephants, birds; 
everything that breathes, movable, immovable: all 
founded upon, all moved by the one Intelligence. In- 
telligence is Spirit. 

Sage WaTnadewa, with this knowledge, did all that he 
desired, left this world for Heaven, became immortal; 
became immortal. 


85 




The Doctrine of the Chhandogyas 
(Chhandogya-Upanishad) 


Book VI 

• l 

Speech, eyes, ears, limbs, life, energy, come to my 
help. These books have Spirit for theme. I shall never 
deny Spirit, nor Spirit deny me. Let me be in union, 
communion with Spirit. When I am one with Spirit, 
may the laws these books proclaim live in me, may the 
laws live. 


2 

6m. Once upon a time there lived Shwetaketu, son 
of Uddalaka. Uddalaka said: 'My son! Find a teacher, 
learn; none of our family has remained a Brahman in 
name only.' 

At twelve he found his teacher; at twenty-four, hav- 
ing completed the study of the Wedas, he returned 
home, stiff-necked, arrogant, self-willed. 

Uddalaka said: 'My son! Y ou think such a lot of your- 
self, but did you ask your teacher about that initiation, 

85 



which makes a man hear what is not heard, think what 
is not thought, know what is not known?' 

'What is that initiation, Lord?' said Shwetaketu. 
Uddalaka said: 'By knowing a lump of clay you know 
all things made of clay; they differ from one another as 
it were in language and in name, having no reality but 
their clay; 

'By knowing one nugget of gold you know all things 
made of gold; they differ from one another as it were 
in language and in name, having no reality but their 
gold; 

'By knowing one piece of base metal you know all 
things made of that metal; they differ from one an- 
other as it were in language and in name, having no 
reality but that metal. 

'For the like reason, after that initiation, you know 
everything.' 

Shwetaketu said: 'My revered teacher cannot have 
known that; had he known it he would have told me. 
Therefore, Lord! teach it.' 

UddSlaka said: 'I will teach it, my son!' 

3 

'My son! In the beginning, there was mere being, 
one without a second. Some say there was mere no- 
thing, nothing whatsoever; that everything has come 
out of nothing. 

'But how can that be true, my son,' said Uddalaka; 
'how could that which is, come from that which is not? 

86 



I put it otherwise; in the beginning there was mere 
being, one without a second. 

'That being thought: "Would that 1 were many! 1 
will create." He created light. Light thought: "Would 
that I were many! I will create!" Light created the 
waters. When anybody weeps or sweats, the tears and 
the sweat are created by light. 

'Those waters thought: "Would that we were many! 
We will create!" They created food. Whenever and 
wherever it rains, food is abundant. Food is from wate .' 

4 

'There are three classes of creatures: the egg-born, 
the womb-born, the soil-born. 

'That divine Being thought: "I will go into the 
three gods — light, water, food. I will give them not 
only life, but names and shapes." 

'He said: " I will make each of them threefold." He 
and life went into the three gods, and He gave them 
names and shapes. 

'You shall hear, my son, how He divides each of the 
three gods into three, and each of these three into three 
again.' 

5 

'Whatever redness is in fire is a shape of light; what- 
ever whiteness, a shape of water; whatever blackness, 
a shape of food. So fire as fire disappears, its shape is a 
name or way of talking; reality lies in the first three gods. 

'Whatever redness is in sun is a shape of light; what- 

87 



ever whiteness a shape of water} whatever blackness a 
shape of food. So sun as sun disappears, its shape is a 
name or way of talking; reality lies in the first three gods. 

'Whatever redness is in moon is a shape of light; 
whatever whiteness a shape of water; whatever black- 
ness a shape of food. So moon as moon disappears, its 
shape is a name or way of talking; reality lies in the first 
three gods. 

' Whatever redness is in lightning is a shape of light; 
whatever whiteness a shape of water; whatever black- 
ness a shape of food. So lightning as lightning disappears, 
its shape is a name or way of talking; reality lies in the 
first three gods. 

'The great householders of the past, men famous for 
their learning and wisdom, had this in mind when they 
said: "Let no man say there is anything we have not 
heard, thought, seen." They knew everything. 

'They knew that redness, no matter where found, 
was always light, whiteness always water, blackness 
always food. 

'They knew that a thing, no matter how strange it 
looked, was but some combination of those three first 
gods. 

'My son, when the three gods enter into man, each 
of those three divides into three.' 

6 

'Food when drunk is changed into three qualities — 
the grossest becomes excrement; the finest mind; what- 
ever is midway, flesh. 


88 



' Water when drunk is changed into three qualities — 
the grossest becomes urine ; the finest becomes life; 
whatever is midway, blood. 

'Light when we eat it in fat or oil, is changed into 
three qualities — the grossest becomes bone ; the finest 
speech; whatever is midway, marrow. 

'Remember, my son! mind comes from food, life 
comes from water, speech comes from light.' 

'Explain once more, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain, my son!' said Uddalaka. 

7 

'The finest quality of curds, when churned, rises up 
as butter. 

'So the finest quality of the food we swallow, rises up 
as mind. 

'The finest quality of the water we swallow, rises up 
as life. 

'The finest quality of the light we swallow, rises up 
as speech. 

'Remember, my son! mind comes from food, life 
comes from water, speech comes from light.* 

'Explain once more, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain, my son!' said Uddalaka. 

8 

'Man has sixteen phases. Abstain from food for a 
fortnight if you will, but drink j if you cut off drink, you 
cut off life.' 


89 



Shwetaketu having abstained from food for a fort- 
night, went to his father and said: 'What is the lesson 
today?' 

Uddalaka asked him to repeat Rig-Weda, Yajur- 
Weda, Sama-Weda verses. 

Shwetaketu said: '1 do not remember them.' 

Uddalaka said: 'A coal no bigger than a fire-fly would 
not make a blaze bigger than itself, so, my son, since 
only one of your sixteen phases remains, you cannot re- 
member the Wedas. Now go and eat; then you will 
understand me,' 

Shwetaketu having taken food, went to his father 
again, answered all his questions. 

Uddalaka said: 'My son! A coal no bigger than a fire- 
fly if fed with hay makes ablaze bigger than itself. 

'One phase that remained out of sixteen fed with 
food blazed up, and now you can remember the Wedas. 

'Remember, my son! mind comes from food, life 
comes from water, speech comes from light.' 

Shwetaketu understood what he said; understood 
what his father said. 


9 

Aruna's son, Uddalaka said to Shwetaketu: 'My son! 
know the nature of sleep. When a man sleeps, he is 
united with that Being, that is himself. We think it 
enough to say that he sleeps, yet he sleeps with him- 
self. 

'A tethered bird, after flying in every direction, 

90 



settles down on its perch; the mind, after wandering in 
every direction, settles down on its life; for, my son! 
mind is tethered to life. 

'Know the nature of hunger and thirst. Man be- 
comes hungry. Water brings his food to his belly. 
Water brings his food, as cowherd his cow, horseman 
his horse, general his army. Remember, my son! that 
body sprouts from food; could it sprout without a root? 

'What is the root of all? What but food? 

'Remember, my son! water is root, food its sprout; 
light is root, water its sprout; in the same way, that 
Being is root, light its sprout. All creatures have their 
root in that Being. He is their rock, their home. 

'Man becomes thirsty. Light brings the water to his 
gullet, as cowherd his cow, horseman his horse, gene- 
ral his army. Remember, my son! that food sprouts 
from water; could it sprout without a root? 

'What is the root of all? What but water? 

'Light is root, water its sprout; that Being is root, 
light its sprout. All creatures have their root in that 
Being; He is their rock, their home. My son! 1 have 
already told you how the three first gods became each 
of them threefold when in contact with body. When a 
man is dying, his speech merges into mind, his mind 
into life, his life into light, his light into the one Being. 

'That Being is the seed; all else but His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That.' 

'Explain once more, Lord ! ' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

91 



10 

'My son! Bees create honey by gathering the sweet 
juices from different flowers, and mixing all into a com- 
mon juice. 

'And there is nothing in honey whereby the juice of 
a particular flower can be identified, so it is with the 
various creatures who merge in that Being, in deep 
sleep or in death. 

'Whatever they may be, tiger, lion, wolf, bear, 
worm, moth, gnat, mosquito, they become aware of 
particular life when they are born into it or awake. 

'That Being is the seedj all else but His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That.* 

'Explain once more, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

11 

'My son! Rivers, flowing east and west, rise from the 
sea, return to the sea, become the sea itself, forget their 
identities. 

'These creatures do not know that they have risen 
from that Being, or returned to that Being. 

'Whatever that may be, tiger, lion, wolf, boar, worm, 
moth, gnat, mosquito, they become aware of particular 
life when they are born into it or awake. 

'That Being is the seed; all else but His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That.' 

'Explain once more, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

92 



12 

'Strike at the bole of a tree, sap oozes but the tree 
lives; strike at the middle of the tree, sap oozes but the 
tree lives; strike at the top of the tree, sap oozes but the 
tree lives. The Self as life, fills the tree; it flourishes in 
happiness, gathering its food through its roots. 

'If life leaves one branch, that branch withers. If life 
leaves a second branch, that branch withers. If life 
leaves a third branch, that branch withers. When life 
leaves the whole tree, the whole tree withers. 

'Remember, my son! The body bereft of Self dies. 
Self does not die. 

That Being is the seed; all else but His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That.' 

'Explain once more, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

13 

Uddalaka asked his son to fetch a banyan fruit. 

'Here it is, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

'Break it,' said Uddalaka. 

'I have broken it, Lord!' 

'What do you see there?' 

'Little seeds, Lord!' 

' Break one of them, my son! ' 

'It is broken, Lord!' 

'What do you see there?' 

'Nothing, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

UddSlaka said: 'My son! This great banyan tree has 

93 



sprung up from seed so small that you cannot see it. 
Believe in what I say, my son! 

'That Being is the seed; all else but 'His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That.' 

'Explain once more, Lord ! ' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

14 

'Put this salt into water, see me tomorrow morning,' 
said Uddalaka. Shwetaketu did as he was told. 

Uddalaka said: 'Bring me the salt you put into water 
last night.' 

Shwetaketu looked, but could not find it. The salt 
had dissolved. 

Uddalaka asked his son how the top of the water 
tasted. Shwetaketu said: 'It is salt,' 

Uddalaka asked how the middle of the water tasted. 

Shwetaketu said: 'It is salt,' 

Uddalaka asked how the bottom of the water tasted. 

Shwetaketu said: 'It is salt,' 

Uddalaka said: 'Throw away the water; come to me. 

Shwetaketu did as he was told and said: 'The salt will 
always remain in the water,' 

Uddalaka said: 'My son! Though you do not find that 
Being in the world. He is there. 

'That Being is the seed; all else but His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That,' 

'Explain once more, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

' T will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

94 



15 

'My son! If a man were taken out of the province of 
Gandhara, abandoned in a forest blindfolded, he would 
turn here and there, he would shout: "I have been 
brought here blindfolded and abandoned!" 

'Thereupon some good man might take off the ban- 
dage and say: "Go in that direction; Gandhara is there." 
The bandage off, he would, if a sensible man, ask his 
way from village to village and come at last to GUnd- 
h9fra. In the same way the man initiated by his master, 
finds his way back into himself. Having remained in 
his body till all his Karma is spent, he is joined to Him- 
*self. 

'That Being is the seed; all else but His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That.' 

'Explain once more, Lord ! ' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

16 

'Relations gather round a sick man and say: "Do you 
remember me? Do you remember me?" He remembers 
until his speech has merged in his mind, his mind in 
his life, his life in his light, his light in the one Being. 

'When his speech is merged in his mind, his mind in 
his life, his life in his light, his light in that one Being, 
what can he remember? 

'That Being is the seed; all else but His expression. 
He is truth. He is Self. Shwetaketu! You are That.' 

'Explain once more, Lord!' said Shwetaketu. 

'I will explain!' said Uddalaka. 

95 



17 

'My son! They bring a man in handcuffs to the ma- 
gistrate, charging him with theft. The magistrate or- 
ders the hatchet to be heated. If the man has commit- 
ted the theft and denies it, he is false to himself, and 
having nothing but that lie to protect him, grasps the 
hatchet; and is burned, 

'If he has not committed the theft, he is true to him- 
self and, with truth for his protector, grasps the hat- 
chet; and is not burned. He is acquitted. 

'The man that was not burnt, lived in truth. Re- 
member that all visible things live in truth; remem- 
ber that truth and Self are one. Shwetaketu! You are 
That.' 

Shwetaketu understood what he said, yes, he under- 
stood what his father said. 

Book VII 

l 

Narada asked Sage Sanatkumar to teach him. 

Sanatkumar said: 'Say what you know; 1 will say 
what you do not,' 

Narada said: 'Lord! 1 know Rig-Weda, Yajur-Weda, 
Sama-Weda, Atharwa-Weda, histoiy and tradition 
called the fifth Weda, grammar, ritual, mathematics, 
astrology, mineralogy, logic, economics, physics, meta- 
physics, zoology, politics, astronomy, mechanics, fine 
arts. 


96 



'Lord! Yet these things are but elementary know- 
ledge; I do not know the Self. I have heard from mas- 
ters, that he who knows Self, goes beyond sorrow. I am 
lost in sorrow. Help me to go beyond.' 

Sanatkumar said: 'All your knowledge is but the 
knowledge of names. The four Wedas, grammar, ritual 
and the like, all that is but a name. Worship name as 
Spirit. 

'Who worships name as Spirit, moves within the 
limits of what is named, as it may please him, provided 
he worships it as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above name?' said Narada. 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 

'Explain it, Lord!' said Narada. 

2 

Sanatkumar said: 'Speech is above name. Through 
speech we understand not only the Wedas, grammar, 
ritual and the like but heaven, earth, wind, air, Water, 
fire, men, gods, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, beasts, worms, 
midges, ants, right, wrong, true, false, good, evil, 
pleasant, unpleasant. Without speech who could ex- 
plain right, wrong; good, evil; pleasant, unpleasant? 
Speech explains all. Worship speech. 

'Who worships speech as Spirit, moves within the 
limits of what is spoken, as it may please him, provided 
he worships it as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above speech?' said NaTada. 

g 97 y,U. 



3 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Mind is above speech. A 
closed fist holds two acorns, two berries, two nuts; so 
mind holds both speech and name. 

'When man thinks ofreading Wedas, he reads them; 
when he thinks of doing, he does; when he thinks of 
children and cattle, he wants them; when he thinks of 
this world or the next, he wants it . Mind is Self. Mind 
is world. Mind is Spirit, Worship mind. 

'Who worships mind as Spirit, moves within the 
limits of what is thought, as it may please him, provided 
he worships mind as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above mind?' said Narada. 

4 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Will is above mind. When 
man wills he thinks, calls up speech which breaks into 
names. Sentences are made out of words, actions are 
made out of thoughts. 

'Everything is founded on will; everything forms 
will; everything lives in will. Heaven and earth will; 
wind and air will; water and light will; rain wills be- 
cause water and light will; food wills because rain wills; 
life wills because food wills; speech wills because life 
wills; actions will because speech wills; world wills be- 
cause actions will; everything wills because world wills. 
Such is will. Worship will. 

'Who worships will as Spirit, obtains the world he 
wills, attains the eternal by his will for the eternal, at- 

98 



tains honour by his will for honour, attains the sorrow- 
less by his will to go beyond sorrow. Who worships will 
as Spirit, moves within the limits of what is willed, as it 
may please him, provided he worships will as nothing 
but Spirit,' 

'Is there anything above will?' said Narada. 

5 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Mind's mother substance is 
above will. When that is stirred, man wills; thinks, 
calls up speech; which breaks forth in words. Sentences 
are made of names; actions are made of thoughts. 

'AH these are founded on mind's mother substance. 
They form that substance, they live in substance. Man 
may be learned in names, but if that substance is ab- 
sent, he is absent; he is ignored by everybody, the 
names go for nothing. Everybody listens to a man, no 
matter how light his learning, if substance be there. 
Therefore that substance is the abode of all. That sub- 
stance is Self, is rock. Worship the mind's mother sub- 
stance. 

'Who worships that as Spirit, moves within the lim- 
its of all that it contains, as it may please him, provided 
he worships it as nothing but Spirit. He attains the 
eternal by becoming eternal, he attains the unchang- 
ing by becoming unchanging, attains joy, becomes 
joy.' 

'Is there anything above that substance?' said Narada. 


99 



6 

'Yes, 'said Sanatkumar. 'Meditation is above substance. 
Earth, sky, heaven, water, mountain, men, gods, medi- 
tate. The greatness of the great comes from meditation. 
Small men quarrel, deceive, denounce ; great men 
meditate, enjoy the greatness that it brings. Worship 
meditation. 

'Who worships meditation as Spirit, moves within the 
limits of its subject, as it may please him, provided he 
worships meditation as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above meditation?' said Narada. 

7 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Wisdom is above medita- 
tion. Through wisdom we understand the four Wedas, 
history, tradition, grammar, ritual and all the other 
sciences; heaven, earth, wind, air, water, fire, men, 
gods, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, beasts, worms, 
midges, ants, right, wrong, true, false, good, evil, 
pleasant, unpleasant, food and its taste, this world and 
the next. Worship wisdom. 

'Who worships wisdom as Spirit, attains all know- 
ledge and experience ; moves within the limits of its 
subject, as it may please him , provided he worships wis- 
dom as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above wisdom?' said Narada. 

8 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Power is above wisdom. 
One powerful man terrifies a hundred wise men. When 

100 



man becomes powerful, he rises; as he rises, he serves} 
as he serves, he associates with the wise; in consultation 
with the wise, -he sees, hears, thinks, knows, acts; be- 
comes wise. Through power we are masters of earth, 
sky, heaven, mountain, men, gods, cattle, herbs, trees, 
beasts, worms, midges and ants. Worship power. 

'Who worships power as Spirit, moves within the 
limits of the powerful, as it may please him, provided 
he worships power as nothing but Spirit,' 

'Is there anything above power?' said Narada. 


9 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Food is above power. If a 
man abstain from food for even ten- days, though he 
may live, he cannot see, hear, think, discriminate, act 
or know. When he eats, he will see, hear, think, dis- 
criminate, act and know. Worship food. 

'Who worships food as Spirit, he obtains food and 
drink as much as he likes, moves within the limits of 
all that eat, as it may please him, provided he worships 
food as nothing but Spirit,' 

'Is there anything above food?' said Narada. 

10 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Water is above food. When 
rain fails creatures fall sick for lack of food; when there 
is enough rain there is enough food, and they rejoice. 
All are images made of water; earth, sky, heaven, 

101 



mountain, men, gods, cattle, herbs, trees, beasts, down 
to worms, midges, ants. Worship water. 

'Who worships water as Spirit gets everything he 
wants, becomes contented, moves within the limits of 
all that drink, as it may please him, provided he wor- 
ships water as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above water?' said Narada. 

11 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Light is above water. When 
light quiets wind, heats air, people say: "It burns, it 
boils, it will rain. " First, light; then water. Light makes 
thunder roll, light makes lightning strike, whether 
above or below. People say: "There is thunder, it will 
rain." Light first; then water. Worship light. 

'Who meditates on light as Spirit, becomes bright, 
attains the receptacles of light, full of brilliance without 
darkness; moves within the limits of all that is bright, 
as it may please him, provided he worships light as no- 
thing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above light?' said Narada. 

12 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Air is above light. Sun, 
moon, lightning, star, fire, live in air; through air we 
speak, through air we hear, through air the echo 
comes. Man enjoys through air, he is born in air, grows 
in air, enjoys in air. Worship air. 

'Who worships air as Spirit, attains the receptacles of 
light, free from sorrow, free from bondage; moves 

102 



within the limits of air, as it may please him, provided 
he worships air as nothing but Spirit,' 

'Is there anything above air?' said Narada. 

13 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Memory is above air. Take 
away memory from men, they no longer hear, 
think, or understand. Give back their memory, they 
hear, think and understand. Through memory 
we recognise our children and our cattle. Worship 
memory. 

'Who worships memory as Spirit, moves wjthin the 
limits of his memory, as it may please him, provided he 
worships memory as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above memory?' said Narada. 

14 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Hope is above memory. 
Fired with hope, man repeats the sacred words, does 
this or that, desires children and property, longs for life 
here and hereafter. Worship hope. 

'Who worships hope as Spirit, gets all he wants, 
never gives a blessing in vain, moves within the limits 
of his hope, as it may please him, provided he worships 
hope as nothing but Spirit.' 

'Is there anything above hope?' said Narada. 

15 

'Yes,' said Sanatkumar. 'Life is above hope. Spokes 
of a wheel are centred in the hub, everything is fixed in 

103 



life. Life lives by life; life gives life; life gives for life. 
Life gives power. Life is father, mother, sister, brother, 
tutor and guide. 

'If a man speak cruel words to a father, mother, sis- 
ter, brother, tutor or guide, people say: "Shame upon 
you for such cruelty!" but if, life once gone, somebody 
shoves them back on to the funeral pyre with a poker, 
where is the cruelty? 

'Life is all. If a man feels and knows this, his reason 
is deeper than discussion. Should people say that his 
reason is deeper than discussion, he should not deny it. 
He who knows truth goes beyond discussion.' 

'Lord! I discuss and at length, that 1 may find truth,' 
said Narada. 

'What should we know but truth?' said Sanatkumar. 

'Lord! 1 would know,' said Narada. 

16 

'How can a man speak the truth, without knowing 
it. Man speaks what he knows. Then know.' 

T would know, Lord!' said Narada. 

17 

'Thinking, man knows; unthinking, he cannot know. 
Therefore think.' 

'I would think, Lord!' said Narada. 

18 

'With faith, man thinks; faithless, he cannot think. 
Therefore have faith.' 

'I would have faith. Lord ! ' said Narada. 

104 



19 

'From devotion, man gets faith; without devotion, 
he has none. Have devotion.' 

'I would have demotion, Lord!' said Narada. 

20 

'When man acts, he gets devotion; without action, 
he has none. Act.' 

'I would act. Lord!' said Narada. 

21 

'Man acts when he gets happiness; without happi- 
ness, he does nothing. Find happiness,' 

'I would be happy, Lord ! ' said Narada. 

22 

'Man gets happiness from the unlimited; from the 
limited, none. Find the unlimited.' 

'I would find the unlimited, Lord!' said Narada. 

23 

'Where man finds a thing, sees nothing else, hears 
nothing else, knows nothingelse, thatis the unlimited; 
where he finds a thing, sees something else, hears some- 
thing else, knows something else, that is the limited. 
The unlimited is immortal; the limited is mortal.' 

'Lord! On what does the unlimited depend?' said 
Narada. 

'On His own greatness,' said Sanatkumar, 'or not 
even that. The possession of cattle, horses, elephants; 

105 



farms, mansions, servants, women, gold; are greatness 
in this world. I do not call it greatness when one thing 
depends upon another. The unlimited depends on no- 
thing.' 

24 

'He is below, above, behind, in front, on the right, 
on the left; He is everything. If I put I instead of He, I 
say, I am below, I am above, I am behind, I am in 
front, I am on the right, I am on the left. I am every- 
thing. 

'I put Self instead of He, I say, the Self is below, 
above, behind, in front, to the right, to the left. The 
Self is everything. The personal Self is the impersonal 
Self. 

'He who sees, thinks, knows this, loves the Self, plays 
with the Self, unites with the Self, enjoys the Self, 
governs himself, moves himself everywhere at his - 
pleasure. Those who think otherwise are governed by 
others. They lose what they gain. Nowhere can they 
move at their pleasure.' 

25 

'He who thinks, feels, knows this, draws life from 
himself, hope from himself, memory from himself ; air, 
light, water from himself; birth, death, food, power, 
knowledge, meditation, mind, will, speech, name, 
words, action, everything from himself. 

'He who knows this, cares nothing for death, cares 
nothing for disease, cares nothing for misery; looks at 
everything with the eye of Self; gets everything every- 

106 



where; remains one, though multiplied threefold, five- 
fold, sevenfold, elevenfold, hundredfold, hundred-and- 
elevenfold, twenty-thousandfold.' 

Pure food creates pure intellect ; pure intellect creates 
strong memory; strong memory cuts all the knots of the 
heart. 

Sage Sanatkumar leads beyond the darkness those 
that have washed their impurities away. Hence men 
call him the Great Commander, men call him the 
Great Commander. 


Book VIII 
1 

In this body, in this town of Spirit, there is a little 
house shaped like a lotus, and in that house there is a 
little space. One should know what is there. 

What is there? Why is it so important? 

There is as much in that little space within the heart, 
as there is in the whole world outside. Heaven, earth, 
fire, wind, sun, moon, lightning, stars; whatever is and 
whatever is not, everything is there. 

If everything is in man's body, every being, every 
desire, what remains when old age comes, when decay 
begins, when the body falls? 

What lies in that space, does not decay when the body 
decays, nor does it fall when the body falls. That space 
is the home of Spirit. Every desire is there. Self is there, 
beyond decay and death; sin and sorrow; hunger and 

107 



thirst ; His aim truth, His will truth. Man can live in 
the body as long as he obeys the law, as a man may live 
in a certain farm, in a certain town, in a certain pro- 
vince, or wherever he fancy, if he obey the law. 

Earthly pleasures exhaust themselves ; heavenly 
pleasures exhaust themselves. Wherever men go with- 
out attaining Self or knowing truth, they cannot move 
at their pleasure; but after attaining Self and knowing 
truth, wherever they go, they move at their pleasure. 

2 

If man wants the company of his fathers, all he need 
do is to will it; they will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants the company of his mothers, all he need 
do is to will it j they will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants the company of his brothers, all he need 
do is to will it; they will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants the company of his sisters, all he need do 
is to will it; they will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants the company of his friends, all he need 
do is to will it; they will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants women, all he need do is to will it ; they 
will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants perfume or flower, all he need do is to 
will it; it will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants food or drink, all he need do is to will it; 
it will appear and make him happy. 

If he wants a thing or a place, all he need do is to will 
it; it will appear and make him happy. 

108 



3 

These wants are justified, but they are smothered by 
self-interest ; it'is because they are so smothered that an 
ignorant man cannot see the dead. 

A wise man sees in Self, those that are alive, those 
that are dead; and gets what this world cannot give. An 
ignorant man treads on the ground, but does not know 
the gold that lies underneath ; we pass into the Self 
during sleep, but do not know Him. 

Self stays in the heart; 'heart', a word that seems to 
say 'here it is'. Who knows this, daily enjoys the King- 
dom of Heaven. 

A wise man, leaving his body, joins that flame; is one 
with His own nature. That nature is Self, fearless im- 
mortal Spirit. 

Whatever binds mortal and immortal, they call truth. 
Who knows this, daily enjoys the Kingdom of Heaven. 

4 

Self is the wall which keeps the creatures from break- 
ing in. Day and night do not go near Him, nor age, nor 
death, nor grief, nor good, nor evil. Sin turns away 
from Him; for Spirit knows no sin. 

Self is the bridge. When man crosses that bridge, if 
blind, he shall see; if sick, he shall be well ; if unhappy, 
he shall be happy. When he crosses that bridge, though 
it be night, it shall be day; for heaven is shining always. 

Heaven is for those that are masters of themselves. 
They can move anywhere in this world at their pleasure. 

109 



5 

Sacrifice is to be master of oneself; for through that 
mastery a wise man knows the Self. Duty is to be mas- 
ter of oneself. Through mastery a wise man knows the 
Self. 

Vows are the mastery of oneself; for through that 
mastery man gets the protection of the Self. Silence is 
the mastery of oneself} for through that mastery man 
attains the meditation upon the Self. 

Fasting is the mastery of oneself ; for through that 
mastery man shares the imperishability of the Self. A 
hermit's life is that mastery. 

In the Kingdom of Heaven are the springs of doing 
and knowing that rise from Spirit itself ; beyond spreads 
the lake of joy ; beyond that blossoms the tree of im- 
mortality ; beyond that lies the town of spirit, full of 
light built by the Lord. 

But heaven is for those that find the springs of doing 
and knowings they can move anywhere in this world at 
their pleasure. 

6 

Orange, blue, yellow, red, are not less in man's ar- 
teries than in the sun. 

As a long highway passes between two villages, one at 
either end, so the sun's rays pass between this world 
and the world beyond. They flow from the sun, enter 
into the arteries, flow back from the arteries, enter into 
the sun. 

When man is asleep, enjoying his sleep, he creates 

110 



no dream; his soul sleeps in the arteries. No evil can 
touch him, for he is filled with light. 

When he is dying, those around him ask if he knows 
them; as long as the soul does not leave the body he 
knows them. 

But when the soul leaves the body, ascending with 

A 

the sun's rays, he meditates on Om and, with the 
speed of thought, goes to the sun. Sun is the Gate of 
Heaven, where the wise can pass. 

Here is my authority: 

'There are a hundred and one arteries leading to the 
heart; one of them pierces the crown of the head. He 
who goes upwards through it, attains immortality; He 
who does not, is born again.' 

7 

Prajapati said: 'Self is free from sin and sorrow; de- 
cay and death; hunger and thirst. His aim is truth; His 
will is truth. Find Him; know Him. Who finds and 
knows Him, gets what he wants, goes where he likes.' 

The godly and the godless both came to know what 
Prajapati said and thought: We swear by our souls, we 
must find that Self, by which we shall get whatever we 
want, go wherever we like.' Indr a from among the godly, 
Wirdchana from among the godless, went to Prajapati, 
with folded hands, without letting one another know. 

They stayed with him for thirty-two days, observing 
the vows; when Prajapati asked for what they stayed, 
they said: 


111 



'Everyone knows that you have said that Self is free 
from sin and sorrow; decay and death; hunger and 
thirst. His aim is truth; His will is truth. Find Him; 
know Him. Who finds and knows Him, gets what he 
wants, goes where he likes. We hope to attain that Self, 
and therefore stay.' 

Prajapati said: 'That Person seen in the eye is Self. 
That is unalarmed, immortal Spirit,' 

They said: 'Lord! Which of the two is Self, the one 
reflected in water, or the one reflected in a mirror?' 

Prajapati said: 'He is reflected in both, reflected 
everywhere.' 


8 

Prajapati said: 'Look at yourself in a bowl of water; 
come again if you do not understand the Self.' 

They looked into the bowl of water. 

Prajapati said: 'What did you see there?' 

They said: 'We saw ourselves; our doubles; even 
with our hair and nails.' 

Prajapati said: 'Shave, put on fine clothes, fine jewels; 
look into the water again.' 

They did accordingly. 

Prajapati said: What did you see?' 

They said: 'Lord! We saw ourselves shaven, dressed, 
adorned.' 

Prajapati said: 'That is Self. That is unalarmed, im- 
mortal Spirit.' 

They both went away satisfied. 

112 



Prajapati said to himself: 'They go without finding 
the Self, without knowing the Self. Who follows 
their philosophy, whether godly or godless,' perishes.' 

Wir6chana, perfectly satisfied, went to the godless 
and preached to them his philosophy: 'Body alone is 
important; body alone is to be adored. Who knows the 
importance of body and adores it, gets everything in 
this world and the next.' 

Hence even today a man who has no faith, no devo- 
tion, no charity, is called godless; for that is the philo- 
sophy of the godless. They supply the dead with food, 
clothes, jewelry; they think thereby to attain heaven, 

9 

But Indra, before he returned to the godly, saw the 
snare. He thought to himself: 'if the body is adorned, 
so is its reflection; if it is well dressed, so is its reflection; 
if it is clean, so is its reflection; but then if the body 
were blind, Self would be blind; if the body were lame, 
Self would be lame; if the body were crippled. Self 
would be crippled; if the body were dead. Self would be 
dead. I see no good in this.' 

He went back with folded hands. 

Prajapati said: 'Indra! you went away with Wir6- 
chana, perfectly satisfied. What brings you back?' 

Indra said: 'Lord! If the body is shaven, dressed, 
adorned, so is its reflection; but if the body were blind, 
lame, crippled. Self would be blind, lame, crippled; if 
the body were dead. Self would be dead. I see no good 
in this.* 


H 


113 


Y.U. 



Prajapati said: 'Indra! This bodily Self is like that. 
Stay for another thirty-two days; I will explain more.' 

Indra stayed accordingly; Prajapati said: 

10 

The Self is the Adorable, who moves in dreams. He 
is the unalarmed, immortal Spirit.' 

Indra went away satisfied but, before he reached the 
godly, saw the snare. He thought within himself: 'Self 
that dreams is not blind, if body is blind; Self is not 
lame, if body is lame; Self is not affected by the defects 
of body. 

'He is not killed when body is killed; he is not 
crippled when body is crippled; yet he is killed and 
chased in dreams; he is unhappy; now and again he 
weeps. I see no good in this.' 

He went back with folded hands. 

Prajapati said: 'Indra! You went away satisfied. What 
brings you back?' 

Indra said: 'Lord! Self is not blind, because body is 
blind; Self is not crippled, because body is crippled; Self 
is not affected by the defects of body. 

'Self is not killed when body is killed. He is not lame, 
if body is lame. Self is killed and chased in dreams; He 
is unhappy; now and again He weeps. I see no good in 
this,' 

Prajapati said: 'You are right. Stay for another 
thirty-two days; I will explain more,' 

Indra stayed accordingly; Prajapati said: 

114 



11 

'When man is fast asleep, at peace with himself, 
happy, without a dream, then that is Self. That is the 
unalarmed, immortal Spirit.' 

Indra went away satisfied but, before he reached the 
godly, saw the snare. He thought within himself: 

'Man in his sleep does not know that he is Self; 
neither does he know any other creatures. He is lost. 
I do not see any good in this.' 

He went back with folded hands. 

Prajapati asked: 'Indra, you went away satisfied. 
What brings you back?' 

Indra said: 'Lord! Sleeping without a dream man 
does not know that he is Self, neither does he know any 
creatures. He is lost. I see no good in this,' 

Prajapati said: 'Indra! Y ou are right; yet where else 
can you find the Self? 

'Stay for five days more; I will explain more,' 

Indra stayed accordingly. He stayed there for a hun- 
dred and one days in all; everybody knows that Indra 
stayed with Prajapati for a hundred and one days, mas- 
tering Self. Prajapati said to him: 

12 

'Indra! This mortal body is under sentence of death; 
nevertheless it is the house of the immortal; the un- 
embodied. So long as He is in body, He likes and He dis- 
likes; so long as He is in body there is no escape. When 
He is without body, likes and dislikes do not touch Him. 

115 



'Wind has no body; cloud, lightning, thunder have 
no body; but when they conjoin with light and rise 
in air, they show in their own shapes. ’ Likewise that 
blessed Self, conjoint with light, rises from body, shows 
himself in His own shape. He moves in this world en- 
joying women, riding in conveyances, entertaining his 
friends, heedless of his body; as a master workman en- 
gages an assistant, Self engages life to look after his 
body. 

'Who sees through the eye, knowing that He sees, is 
Self, the eye an instrument whereby He sees; who 
smells through the nose, knowing that He smells, is 
Self, the nose an instrument whereby He smells; who 
speaks through the tongue, knowing that He speaks, is 
Self, the tongue an instrument whereby He speaks; 
who hears through the ear, knowing that He hears, is 
Self, the ear an instrument whereby He hears; who 
thinks through the mind, knowing that He thinks, is 
Self, the mind an instrument whereby He thinks. He 
looks through the mind's eye, his spiritual eye; in that 
eye heaven is made and all desires arise; all these his joy. 

'Gods adore that Self; thereby go where they will; 
satisfy every desire. Who discovers and knows the Self, 
goes where he will; satisfies every desire.' 

13 

1 have been drifting from darkness to passion, from 
passion to darkness. Shaking off evil, as a horse shakes off 
his' loose hair, freeing myself from evil as the moon 

116 



breaks free from the eclipse, attaining the aim of my 
life, I enter the Kingdom of Heaven, where there is 
nothing more to attain; I enter the Kingdom of Heaven. 


14 

Names and shapes but hang in air; in very truth they 
live in immortal Spirit. He is Self. 

Grant that I may enter the audience chamber. Grant 
that I may become glory itself; the glory of saints, the 
glory of kings, the glory of merchants; grant that I 
attain the glory of all glories. Grant that I may never 
be bopn again. 


15 

The Creator gave this knowledge to Prajapati; Pra- 
japati to Manu; Manu to mankind. 

He who studies the Wedas rightly, under the right 
teacher, does the right by that teacher; returns home; 
settles himself as an householder in a sacred place, 
keeps his study of the Wedas, leads a holy life, turns 
his senses towards the Self, never asks anything of any- 
one unless upon pilgrimage, and leads such a life to the 
last, he attains the Kingdom of Heaven; he never re- 
turns. 


117 




X 

Famous Debates in the Forest 
(Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad) 


Book I 

Lead me from the unreal to the real! 

Lead me from darkness to light! 

Lead me from death to immortality! 

In the beginning all things were Self, in the shape of 
personality. He looked round, saw nothing but Him- 
self. The first thing he said was, 'It is I . ' Hence 'I' be- 
came His name. Therefore even now if you ask a man 
who he is, he first says, 'It is I'„ and gives what other 
name he has. He is the eldest of all. Because he de- 
stroyed all evil, he is called the first Person. He who 
knows this, destroys all evil, takes the first rank. 

He became afraid ; loneliness creates fear. He 
thought: 'As there is nothing but myself, why should I 
be afraid?' Then his fear passed away; there was no- 
thing to fear, fear comes when there is a second. 

As a lonely man is unhappy, so he was unhappy. He 
wanted a companion. He was as big as man and wife 
together ; He divided himself into two, husband and 
wife were born. 


119 



Yadnyawalkya said: 'Man is only half himself; his 
wife is the other half.' 

They joined and mankind was born. • 

She thought: 'He shall not have me again; he has 
created me from himself; 1 will hide myself.' 

She then became a cow, he became a bull; they 
joined and cattle were born. She became a mare, he a 
stallion; she became a she-ass, he an ass; they joined 
and the hoofed animals were born. She became a she- 
goat, he a goat; she became a ewe, he a ram; they 
joined and goats and sheep were born. Thus He created 
everything down to ants, male and female. 

Then he put his hand into his mouth and there 
created fire as if he were churning butter. He knew that 
He was this creation; that He created it from Himself; 
thatHe wasthecause. Whoknows, finds creationjoyful. 

When they say: 'Sacrifice to this or that god,' they 
talk of separate gods; but all gods are created by Him, 
and He is all gods. 

Whatever is liquid He created from His seed. 
Everything in this world is eater or eaten. The 
seed is food and fire is eater. 

He created the gods; created mortal men, created 
the immortals. Hence this creation is a miracle. He who 
knows, finds this miracle joyful. 

This world was everywhere the same till name and 
shape began; then one could say: 'He has such a name 
and such a shape.' Even today everything is made dif- 
ferent by name and shape. 

120 



Self entered into everything, even the tips of finger- 
nails. He is hidden like the razor in its case. Though He 
lives in this world and maintains it, the ignorant can- 
not see Him. 

When he is breathing, they name Him breath; when 
speaking, they name Him speech} when seeing, they 
name Him eye; when hearing, they name Him ear ; 
when thinking, they name Him mind. He is not wholly 
there. All these names are the names of His actions. 

He who worships Him as the one or the other is ig- 
norant, is imperfect; though he attain completely one 
or the other perfection. Let him worship Him as Self, 
where all these become the whole. 

This Self brings everything; for thereby everything 
is known. He is the footprint that brings a man to his 
goal. He who knows this attains name and fame. 

This Self is nearer than all else; dearer than son, 
dearer than wealth, dearer than anything. If a man call 
anything dearer than Self, say that he will lose what is 
dear; of a certainty he will lose it ; for Self is God. There- 
fore one should worship Self as Love. Who worships 
Self as Love, his love never shall perish. 

It is said everything can be got through the know- 
ledge of Spirit. What is that knowledge? 

In the beginning there was Spirit. It knew itself as 
Spirit; from that knowledge everything sprang up. 
Whosoever among gods, sages and men, got that know- 
ledge, became Spirit itself. Sage Wamadewa knew it 
and sang 'I was Manu; I was the sun.' 

121 



Even today he who knows that he is Spirit, becomes 
Spirit, becomes everything; neither gods nor men can 
prevent him, for he has become themselves. 

Who thinks of himself as separate from Self, and 
worships some other than Self, he is ignorant; becomes 
a sacrificial animal for the gods. 

As many beasts serve a man, man serves the gods; if 
one beast is taken away, man is sorry, and much more 
sorry if many are taken away? For a like reason gods 
dislike men who get this knowledge. 

In the beginning all things were Spirit, one and sole; 
hence He lacked power. He created the good kings. 
Indra, Waruna, Soma, Rudra, Parjanya, Yama, Mrityu, 
Eeshana, are the kings among gods. 

Hence the king is above all men. The priest occupies 
a lower seat at the coronation. The priest confers the 
crown upon the king, is the root of the king's power. 

Therefore though the king attain supremacy at the 
end of his coronation he sits below the priest and ac- 
knowledges him as the root of his power. So whoever 
destroys the priest, destroys his root. He sins; he de- 
stroys the good. 

He still lacked power; therefore He created the traders, 
that are arrayed in guilds like those troups of the gods; 
Wasus, Rudras, Adityas, Maruts and Wishwedewas. 

He still lacked power; therefore He created the lab- 
ourer who, like the god Pushan, feeds all. This 
earth is PushUn, for it feeds everything everywhere. 

He still lacked power; therefore He created the good 

122 



law. That law is the power of the king; there is nothing 
higher than law. Even a weak man rules the strong 
with the help of law; law and the king are the same. 
Law is truth. Who speaks the truth, speaks the law; 
who speaks the law, speaks the truth; they are the 
same. 

Thus Spirit became the priest, the ruler, the trader, 
the labourer. Among the gods, Spirit appeared as fire; 
among men He appeared as priest; He became the king 
whose duty is to rule; the trader, whose duty is to trade; 
the labourer, whose duty is to serve. People wish for a 
place among the gods through fire, for a place among 
mankind through the priest; for Spirit appeared in 
these two forms. 

If a man leaves this kingdom without knowing that 
he owns the kingdom of Self, that Self is of no service 
to him; it remains like the unread Wedas, or a deed not 
done. No, even if he does a great meritorious deed with- 
out knowing the Self, that deed will exhaust itself in 
the end. Worship the kingdom of Self. He who wor- 
ships the kingdom of Self, does that which is never ex- 
hausted; whatever he wants, he gets from himself. 

Hence this Self is the goal of all creatures. As long 
as man makes offerings and sacrifices, he pleases the 
gods; as long as he studies the Wedas, he pleases the 
wise; as long as he offers libations and desires chil- 
dren, he pleases the fathers; as long as he gives food 
and shelter, he pleases mankind; as long as he gives 
fodder and water the beasts are pleased; if birds and 

123 



beasts down to the ants are fed in his house, they are 
pleased. But everybody wishes good to the man who has 
this knowledge; everybody is good to the man who is 
good to him. 

In the beginning there was the Self, one and sole. 
He thought: 'Let me have a wife that I may have chil- 
dren; let me have wealth that I may do something in 
the world,' Thus far desire can go; even if man wants 
more, he cannot get it. 

A lonely man thinks of a wife and children, of 
wealth and work; and so long as he does not get any 
of these, he thinks he is incomplete. Yet he is already 
complete; his mind is himself; speech his wife; life his 
offspring; eyes are his human wealth, for through eyes 
he gets it ; ears his divine wealth, for through ears he gets 
it; body his work, for through body he works. This is 
the fivefold sacrifice; it applies to man, animal, every- 
thing. Who knows this, gets everything. 


Book II 

There lived Gargya, son of Balaka, learned yet proud. 
He went to Janaka, the king of Benares, and said: 'I 
will teach you about Spirit.' 

Janaka said: 'People flock to me, my name on their 
lips, yet I give you a hundred cows for that promise.' 

Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
the sun.' 


124 



Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. He transcends all being} I worship Him as the 
crowned king of all. Who worships Him as such, trans- 
cends all being, becomes the crowned king of all.' 

Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
the moon.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as the great king, the heavenly 
drinker, clad in purity. Who worships Him as the 
great King, milks heaven and drinks it day by day. His 
food is never exhausted.' 

Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
lightning.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as light. Who worships Him as 
light becomes enlightened ; his children become en- 
lightened,' 

Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
the air.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as the still and the full. Who 
worships Him as the full is blessed with children and 
cattle. His family shall never be cut off.' 

Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
wind.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as that impregnable, unconquer- 
able army. Who worships Him as that army conquers 
his enemies.' 


125 



Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in fire,' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as the tolerant; for fire warms the 
good and the bad. Who worships Him as the tolerant 
becomes tolerant; his children become tolerant.' 

Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
water.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as a reflection. Who worships Him 
as a reflection gets what he wants; nothing runs against 
him; his children reflect him.' 

Gargya said: '1 worship as Spirit the God that is the 
mirror.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as beauty. Who worships Him 
as beauty becomes beautiful; his children become beau- 
tiful; he is adored by everybody.' 

Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
the echo.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as life coming out of life. Who 
worships Him as life is blessed with abounding life. He 
does not die until all is spent.' 

Gargya said: '1 worship as Spirit the God that is in 
the four quarters.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. 1 worship Him as my double, who never for- 
sakes me. Who worships H i m as his double is surrounded 
by friends; his neighbours do not forsake him.' 

126 



Gargya said: 'I worship as Spirit the God that is in 
the shadow.' 

Janaka said: .'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. I worship Him as death. Who worships Him as 
death gets long life; he does not die too soon,' 

Gargya said: '1 worship as Spirit the God that is in 
the body.' 

Janaka said: 'No, no; that is no right way to talk of 
Spirit. 1 worship Him as a man. Who worships Him 
as a man gets the body he wants, his children get the 
bodies they want.' 

Gargya became silent. 

Janaka said: 'Is that all?' 

Gargya said: 'That is all,' 

Janaka said: 'Spirit is not so quickly known,' 

Gargya said: T come to you as a pupil,' 

Janaka said: 'It is unusual for a preacher to come to a 
king, to learn about Spirit. However, I will make you 
understand Him clearly,' 

He took him by the hand and rose. The two came to 
a sleeping man. Janaka called out: 'Mighty man! Pure 
man! Heavenly drinker!' He did not wake; he woke 
when Janaka took him by the hand. 

Janaka said: 'Where was this man's knowing Self 
when he slept, whence came he when he woke?' 

Gargya could not understand. 

Janaka said: 'When he slept, the knowing Self, all the 
senses within it, lay at rest in the hollow of the heart. 
When Self has mastered sense, man is said to sleep. 

127 



Life is absorbed; speech, sight, hearing, thinking, ab- 
sorbed. 

'But when Self moves in dreams, He becomes his 
dreams. He becomes a great king; he becomes a great 
priest; he becomes the high and the low. As a great 
king surrounded by his retinue moves in his own country 
at his pleasure, Self, surrounded by his senses, 
moves in his own body, at his pleasure. 

'But when man is in deep sleep he knows nothing; 
Self having crept out of those seventy-two thousand 
arteries called the Hita, which spread from the heart 
through all the body, goes to rest surrounded by his 
body. Whether a child, or a king or a holy man, he 
transcends all happiness and goes to sleep. Thus it is 
that Self goes to sleep. 

' As threads come from the spider, as little sparks come 
from the fire, so all senses, all conditions, all gods, all 
beings, come from this Self. He is known as the "Truth 
of all truths". The senses are true, but He is the truth of 
them all,' 


Book III 

Spirit has two aspects: measurable, immeasurable; 
mortal, immortal; stable, unstable; graspable, ungrasp- 
able. 

Everything on this earth except wind and sky is 
measurable, mortal, stable, graspable; it comes from 

128 



the graspable, from the sun that shines in the heavens, 
the substance of the graspable. 

Wind and sky are immeasurable, immortal, un- 
stable, ungraspable; they come from the ungraspable, 
from God that shines through the sun, the substance of 
the ungraspable.. 

This is the material aspect of Spirit. 

Now the divine aspect of Spirit. 

Everything in the body except life and heart is 
measurable, mortal, stable, graspable; it comes from 
the graspable, from the eye, the substance of the 
graspable. 

Life and heart are immeasurable, immortal, un- 
stable, ungraspable; they come from the ungraspable, 
from God that shines in the right eye, the substance of 
the ungraspable. 

And what is the shape of that God? It is like a saffron- 
coloured garment, like a white woollen garment, like 
red cochineal, like the flame of fire, like the white 
lotus, like a sudden flash of lightning. Who knows Him 
thus, his glory flashes like lightning. 

They describe Spirit as 'Not this ; not that'. The first 
means: 'There is nothing except Spirit': the second 
means: There is nothing beyond Spirit.' They call 
Spirit the 'Truth of all truths'. The senses are true, but 
He is the truth ofthem all. 


129 


Y.U. 



Book IV 


Yadnyawalkya said to Maitreyee: 'Dear! I am going 
to renounce the world: I wish to divide my property 
between you and Katyayanee.' 

Maitreyee said: 'Lord! If I get the wealth of the 
world, will it make me immortal?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'No, your life will be like the 
life of the wealthy. There is no hope of immortality 
through wealth.' 

Maitreyee said: 'What can I do with that which can- 
not make me immortal? Tell me what you know of im- 
mortality.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Well spoken! You were dear to 
me; those words have made you dearer. Come, sit 
down. I will explain; meditate on what I say.' 

He continued: 'Of a certainty, the wife does not love 
her husband for himself but loves him for herself only. 

'The husband does not love his wife for herself, but 
loves her for himself only. 

'The father does not love his sons for themselves, but 
loves them for himself only. 

'A man does not love his wealth for itself, but loves 
it for himself only. 

'A man does not love the priests for themselves, but 
loves them for himself only. 

'A man does not love the rulers for themselves, but 
loves them for himself only. 

130 



'A man does not love the community for itself, but 
loves it for himself only. 

'A man does- not love the gods for themselves, but 
loves them for himself only. 

'A man does not love the creatures for themselves, 
but loves them for himself only. 

'A man does not love anything for itself, but loves 
it for himself only. 

'Maitreyee! This Self deserves to be seen, heard, 
thought of, meditated upon. When this Self is seen, 
heard, thought of, known, everything becomes known, 

'The priestly order ignores the man who thinks of it 
as anything apart from the Self. 

'The ruling order ignores the man who thinks of it 
as anything apart from the Self. 

'The community ignores the man who thinks of it as 
anything apart from the Self. 

'The gods ignore the man who thinks of them as 
anything apart from the Self. 

'The creatures ignore the man who thinks of them 
as anything apart from the Self. 

'Everything ignores the man who thinks of it as any- 
thing apart from the Self. 

'Hence this Self is the priest, the ruler ; He is all gods, 
all men, all creatures, all that exists ; for these are 

'As the sounds of a drum that cannot be understood 
unless we understand the drum and the drummer; 

'As the sounds of a conch that cannot be understood 
unless we understand the conch and the blower; 

131 



'As the sounds of a lute that cannot be understood 
unless we understand the lute and the player. 

'As clouds of smoke come from fire kindled with damp 
fuel, from the great Being come the Rig-Weda, Yajur- 
Weda, Sama-Weda, Atharwa-Weda, history, ancient 
knowledge, sciences, Upanishads, poetry, aphorisms, 
commentaries, explanations. These are His breath. 

'As all waters belong to the sea, all touches to the 
skin, all smells to the nose, all tastes to the tongue, all 
beauties to the eye, all words to the ear, all thoughts to 
the mind, all knowledge to the intellect, all works to 
the hand, all journeys to the feet, all Wedas to speech} 
so everything belongs to H i m . 

'As a lump of salt thrown in water dissolves, and can- 
not be taken out again as salt, though wherever we 
taste the water it is salt, so this great endless deathless 
Being dissolved is knowledge; He reveals Himself with 
the elements, disappears when they disappear; leaving 
no name behind.' 

Maitreyee said: 'You say, Lord! that after death no 
name is left behind; this has confounded me,' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Maitreyee! I say nothing that 
should confound you. It is easy to understand. 

'For as long as there is duality, one sees the other, 
one smells the other, one hears the other, one speaks to 
the other; one thinks of the other, one knows the other; 
but when everything is one Self, who can see another, 
how can he see another; who can smell another, how 
can he smell another; who can hear another, how can 

152 



he hear another ; who can speak to another, how can he 
speak to another; who can think of another, how can 
he think of another; who can know another, how can 
he know another? Maitreyee! How can the knower be 
known?' 


Book V 

This earth is the honey of all beings; all beings the 
honey of this earth. The bright eternal Self that is in 
earth, the bright eternal Self that lives in this body, are 
one and the same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, 
that is all. 

Water is the honey of all beings; all beings the honey 
of water. The bright eternal Self that is in water, the 
bright eternal Self that lives in human seed, are one 
and the same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, that is 
all. 

Fire is the honey of all beings; all beings the honey 
of fire. The bright eternal Self that is in fire, the bright 
eternal Self that lives in speech, are one and the same; 
that is immortality, that is Spirit, that is all. 

Wind is the honey of all beings; all beings the honey 
of wind. The bright eternal Self that is in wind, the 
bright eternal Self that lives in breath, are one and the 
same; that is immortality , that is Spirit, that is all. 

The sun is the honey of all beings; all beings the 
honey of the sun. The bright eternal Self that is in the 

133 



sun, the bright eternal Self that lives in the eye, are 
one and the same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, 
that is all. 

The quarters are the honey of all beings; all beings 
the honey of the quarters. The bright eternal Self that 
is in the quarters, the bright eternal Self that lives in 
the ear, are one and the same; that is immortality, that 
is Spirit, that is all. 

The moon is the honey of all beings; all beings the 
honey of the moon. The bright eternal Self that is in 
the moon, the bright eternal Self that lives in the mind, 
are one and the same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, 
that is all. 

Lightning is the honey of all beings, all beings the 
honey of lightning. The bright eternal Self that is in 
lightning, the bright eternal Self that lives in the light 
of the body, are one and the same; that is immortality, 
that is Spirit, that is all. 

Thunder is the honey of all beings; all beings the 
honey of thunder. The bright eternal Self that is in 
thunder, the bright eternal Self that lives in the voice, 
are one and the same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, 
that is all. 

Air is the honey of all beings; all beings the honey of 
air. The bright eternal Self that is in air, the bright 
eternal Self that lives in the hollow of the heart, are 
one and the same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, 
that is all. 

Law is the honey of all beings; all beings are the 

134 



honey of law. The bright eternal Self that is in law, 
the bright eternal Self that lives as the law in the body, 
are one and the-same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, 
that is all. 

Truth is the honey of all beings; all beings the honey 
of truth. The bright eternal Self that is truth, the 
bright eternal Self that lives as the truth in man, are one 
and the same ; that is immortality, that is Spirit, that 
is all. 

Mankind is the honey of all beings ; all beings the 
honey of mankind. The bright eternal Self that is in 
mankind, the bright eternal Self that lives in a man, 
are one and the same ; that is immortality, that is Spirit, 
that is all. 

Self is the honey of all beings ; all beings the honey of 
Self. The bright eternal Self that is everywhere, the 
bright eternal Self that lives in a man, are one and 
the same; that is immortality, that is Spirit, that is 
all. 

This Self is the Lord of all beings ; as all spokes are 
knit together in the hub, all things, all gods, all men, 
all lives, all bodies, are knit together in that Self. 

This is the honey that Dadheechi gave to Ashwinee- 
kumSrs. A sage said to Ashwineekumars: 'As a reward 
for cutting off his head and substituting a horse's head 
Dadheechi gave you this honey, daring man! I pro- 
claim this news, as thunder proclaims the rain. Dad- 
heechi kept his word; though this honey was his secret, 
he gave it; gave this secret of creation. 

135 



'He made the two-footed; He made the four-footed. 
He, the great god, became the bird, entered into its 
body. He is the God who lives in all bodies. There is 
nothing that does not fill Him; nothing that He does not 

fill. 

'He wanted every form, for He wanted to show Him- 
self; as a magician He appeal's in many forms, He mas- 
ters hundreds and thousands of powers. He is those 
powers; those millions of powers, those innumerable 
powers. He is Spirit; without antecedent, without pre- 
cedent, without inside, without outside; omnipresent, 
omniscient. Self is Spirit. That is revelation. 


Book VI 

Adoration to the highest Self. 

King Janaka of Behar sacrificed. Costly gifts were 
given to the priests. Many priests from the provinces of 
Kuru and Panchala had come. Janaka wanted to find 
out who knew most. He bought a thousand cows, every 
cow had ten gold coins tied between its horns. 

He said: 'Venerable Priests! Let him, who knows 
Spirit, take those cows.' 

But the priests dared not. 

Thereupon Yadnyawalkya said to his pupil: 'Sama- 
shrawa! my son, take these cows.' He obeyed. 

The other priests were angry. They said: 'How dare 
he call himself the wisest among us?' 

156 



Ashwala, a priest attached to the court of Janaka, 
said: 

'Yadnyawalkya! Do you think you are the wisest 
among us?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: '1 bow to him who knows Spirit. 
1 wanted the cows.' 

Ushasta, son of Chakra, said: 'Yadnyawalkya! Ex- 
plain that Spirit, which out of sight is known by sight; 
that Self who lives in the hearts of all.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Your own Self lives in the 
hearts of all.' 

Ushasta said: 'What Self do you say lives in the hearts 
of all?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'He who inhales with the help of 
Prana is your Self, living in the hearts of all. He who 
exhales with the help of Apana is your Self, living in 
the hearts of all. He who diffuses breath with the help 
of Wyana is your Self, living in the hearts of all. He who 
goes out with the help of Udana is your Self, living in 
the hearts of all. Your own self lives in the hearts of all.' 

Ushasta said: 'As one might point and say "this is a 
cow; this is a horse", explain Spirit; that Spirit which 
out of sight is known by sight; that Self who lives in 
the hearts of all.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Your own Self lives in the 
hearts of all.' 

Ushasta said: 'What Self do you say lives in the hearts 
of all?' 


137 



Yadnyawalkya said: ' You cannot see the seer of the 
sight, you cannot hear the hearer of the sound, you 
cannot think of the thinker of the thought, you cannot 
know the knower of the known. Your own Self lives in 
the hearts of all. Nothing else matters.' 

Thereupon Ushasta became silent. 

Then Kahola, son of Kusheetaka said: 'Yadnyawalk- 
ya! Explain that Spirit which out of sight is known by 
sight; that Self who lives in the hearts of all.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Your own Self lives in the 
hearts of all.' 

Kahola said: 'What Self do you say lives in the hearts 
of all?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'He who is beyond hunger, 
thirst, delusion, sorrow, decay, death. When saints 
know that Self, they conquer desire for children, 
wealth, companions, live the life of mendicants. De- 
sire for children is desire for wealth; desire for wealth 
is desire for companions; therefore let a spiritual man 
transcend all book-learning, and live like a child. When 
he transcends book-learning and childlike simplicity, 
let him meditate. When he transcends meditation and 
lack of meditation, he becomes a saint.' 

'By what means?' said Kahola. 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'By whatever means please him 
best, so long as he becomes like that. Nothing but the 
Self matters.' Thereupon Kahola became silent. 


138 



Then Gargee, daughter of Wachaknu, asked: 

'Yadnyawalkya! Since everything in this world is 
woven, warp and woof, on water, please tell me, on 
what is water woven, warp and woof?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Gargee! It is woven on wind.' 

'On what is wind woven, warp and woof?' 

'On the sky.' 

'On what is sky woven, warp and woof?' 

'On the region of the celestial choir.' 

'On what is the region of the celestial choir woven, 
warp and woof?' 

'On the sun.' 

'On what is the sun woven, warp and woof?' 

'On the moon.' 

'On what is the moon woven, warp and woof?' 

'On the stars.' 

'On what are the stars woven, warp and woof?' 

'On the region of gods.' 

'On what is the region of gods woven, warp and 
woof?' 

'On the region of light . ' 

'On what is the region of light woven, warp and 
woof?' 

'On the region of the Creator.' 

'On what is the region of the Creator woven, warp 
and woof?' 

'On the region of Spirit.' 

'On what is the region of Spirit woven, warp and 

woof?' 


139 



Yadnyawalkya said: 'Gargee! Do not transgress the 
limit; or you may go crazy,' 

Gargee became silent. 


Then Uddalaka, of the family of Aruna, said: 'Yad- 
nyawalkya! We were staying in the province of Madra 
in the house of Palanjala Kapya, studying the ritual of 
sacrifice. 

'A celestial singer entered into his wife. We asked 
him who he was. 

'He said: "i am Kabandha of the family of Athar- 
wana." 

'He said: "Do you know that thread wherein this 
world, the next world and all beings are strung?" 

' "I do not know, Sir," said I . 

'He said: "Do you know who controls this world, the 
next world and all beings from within?" 

' "Ido not know, Sir!" said I. 

'He said: "Who knows thread and controller, knows 
Spirit, knows the world, knows the gods, knows all 
beings, knows all knowledge, knows the Self, knows 
everything." 

'He then explained everything, hence I know every- 
thing. If, Yadnyawalkya! you drive away these cows 
without knowing that thread and that controller, you 
will be lost.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'I know the thread, and the con- 
troller.* 


140 



Uddalaka said: 'Anybody can say that he knows, that 
he is wise. What do you know?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Life is that thread whereon this 
world, the next world, and all beings are strung. We say 
that when a man is dead his limbs are unstrung; every- 
thing is strung on life.' 

Uddalaka said: 'So it is; now what of the controller 
within?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'He who lives on earth, apart 
from earth, whom earth does not know; whose body is 
earth; controlling earth from within; is your own Self, 
the immortal, the controller. 

'He who lives in water, apart from water, whom 
water does not know; whose body is water, controlling 
water from within; is your own Self, the immortal, the 
controller. 

'He who lives in sky, wind, heaven, quarters, sun, moon, 
stars, air, darkness, light; apart from them; whom sky, 
wind, heaven, quarters, sun, moon, stars, air, darkness, 
light do not know; whose body is sky, wind, heaven, quar- 
ters, sun, moon, stars, air, darkness, light; controlling 
them from within; is your own Self, the immortal, the 
controller. Thus He lives in all gods. 

'He who lives in all beings, apart from them, whom 
no being knows; whose body is all beings; controlling 
all beings from within; is your own Self, the immortal, 
the controller. Thus he lives in all beings. 

'He who lives in breath, speech, eyes, ears, skin, 
mind, knowledge; apart from them; whom breath, 

141 



speech, eyes, ears, skin, mind, knowledge do not know; 
whose body is breath, speech, eyes, ears, skin, mind, 
knowledge; controlling them from within; is your own 
Self, the immortal, the controller. 

'Thus he lives in man's body. 

'He who lives in man's seed; apart from it; whom 
man's seed does not know; whose body is seed; con- 
trolling it from within; is your own Self, the immortal, 
the controller. 

'Invisible, He sees; inaudible. He hears; unthink- 
able, He thinks; unknowable, He knows. None other 
can see, hear, think, know. He is your own Self, the 
immortal; the controller; nothing else matters.' 

Thereupon Uddalaka became silent. 

Then Gargee said: 'Revered sirs! I can ask him two 
questions, that if he answer, no one amongst you can 
defeat him in discussion about Spirit.' 

The venerable Brahmans gave her permission. 

Gargee said: 'Yadnyawalkya! As a soldier from 
Benares or Behar might string his loosened bow and 
rise with two deadly arrows, so I have risen to fight 
you. Answer my questions.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'What are they?' 

Gargee said: 'Yadnyawalkya! Tell me, on what is 
woven, warp and woof, that which is above heaven, 
below earth, containing heaven and earth; that which 
is past, present and future?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'That which is above heaven, 

142 



below earth, containing heaven and earthy that which 
is past, present and future, is woven, warp and woof, 
on air.' 

Gargee said: 'Yadnyawalkya! I curtsy; you have 
solved my doubt. Now answer my second question.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'What is that?' 

Gargee said: 'Yadnyawalkya! On what is that air 
woven, warp and woof?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'The saints call it the Root. It is 
neither big nor little, neither long nor short, neither 
burning like fire nor flowing like water; without sha- 
dow, -without darkness, without wind, without air, with- 
out attachment; without touch, taste, sight, smell; with- 
out hearing, speaking, thinking; without breath, without 
face, without energy, without measure, without inside 
or outside; it consumes nothing; nothing consumes it. 

'Gargee! At the command of that Root, sun and moon 
do not clash; heaven and earth do not clash; moments, 
hours, days, nights, fortnights, months, seasons, years, 
follow their course; rivers issuing from the snowy moun- 
tains follow their course to east and west or where you 
will. At the command of that Root, people praise the 
generous, gods guard the sacrificer, fathers watch the 
sacrificial offerings. 

'Gargee! who without knowing this Root, meditates, 
sacrifices, practises austerity, though for thousands of 
years, does what passes away. Who dies without know- 
ing this Root, is pitiful; who leaves this world, knowing 
it, is wise. 


145 



'Gargee! That Root sees, though invisible} hears, 
thoughjnaudible thinks, though unthinkable; knows, 
though unknowable. Nothing else ‘can see, hear, 
think, know. Air is woven on that Root, warp and 
woof.' 

Gargee said: 'Revered sirs! Anybody has a right to 
be proud who can escape this sage, with a curtsy; no 
one can defeat him in discussion about Spirit.' 

Thereupon Gargee became silent. 

Widagdha Shakala asked: ' Yadnyawalkya! How many 
gods are there?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Three hundred and three and 
three thousand and three, as is mentioned in the list 
of the hymns to all gods.' 

'Right,' said Widagdha; 'but how many in reality?' 

'Thirty-three.' 

'Right; but how many in reality?' 

'Six.' 

'Right; but how many in reality?' 

'Three.' 

'Right; but how many in reality?' 

'Two.' 

'Right; but how many in reality?' 

'One and a half.' 

'Right; but how many in reality?' 

'One God only.' 

'Then what are those three hundred and three and 
three thousand and three?' 

144 



'The divine powers; the more important being thirty- 
three.' 

'What are those thirty-three?' 

'Eight Wasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Xditya”s, Indra 
and Prajapati.' 

'What are the Wasus?' 

'Fire, earth, wind, sky, sun, moon, stars, heaven.' 
'What are the eleven Rudras?' 

'Five living fires, five senses and the personal Self. 
When they leave our body, they make us cry out; hence 
their name Rudra.' 

'What are Adityas?' 

'Twelve months of the year; they pass carrying 
everything; hence their name.' 

'Who is Indra? Who is Prajapati?' 

'Indra is thunder; Prajapati is sacrifice.' 

'What is the symbol of thunder?' 

'The thunderbolt.' 

'What is the symbol of sacrifice?' 

'The sacrificial animal.' 

'What are the six gods?' 

'Fire, earth, wind, air, sun, sky; all the world lives 
therein.' 

'What are the three gods?' 

'The three worlds; all the gods live therein.' 

'What are the two gods?' 

'Food and breath.' 

'What is one and a half?' 

'The wind.' 

K 145 


Y.U. 



'The wind is one, why is it called one and a half?' 

'Because as the wind blows, everything grows,' 

'Who is the one God?' 

'life is the one God. It is that Spirit . 7 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Revered sirs! Anybody in this 
assembly can question me; I can question anybody or I 
can question all.' 

Nobody dared question him. 

Then Yadnyawalkya questioned them: 'Man is like a 
big tree; his hairs are leaves, his skin bark; blood can 
ooze from a wound like sap from a tree; there is flesh in 
man, wood in the tree; his muscles are like its fibres, 
his bones like hard wood, his marrow like its pith. 

'The tree when felled grows up again from its root, 
from what root does man grow when cut down by 
death? 

'Do not say that he grows from his seed, his seed dies 
with him; the tree can grow from its seed, its seed does 
not die with it. 

'If the tree is pulled root and all, it will not grow 
again. From what root or seed does a man, cut down by 
death, grow again? 

'He is not born again as he is; then who creates him 
again?' 

Yadnyawalkya answered his question: 'Spirit is the 
root, the seed; for him who stands still and knows, the 
invulnerable rock. Spirit is knowledge; Spirit is joy,' 


146 



Janaka, king of Behar, descending from his throne, 
said: 'Yadnyawalkya! I bow. Teach me,' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'King! As one about to make a 
long journey is furnished with ship or carriage, so 
you are furnished with the sacred teachings. Though 
a rich king, you have learnt the Wedas and the 
Upanishads; where will you go, when you leave this 
world?' 

Janaka said: 'Lord! I do not know where I shall go.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'But I can tell you where.' 

Janaka said:' Tell me.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'In the right eye Self lives and 
kindles the light; in the left eye His queen. They meet 
in the hollow of the heart, feed on the heart's red lump, 
rest in the network of the veins, move through the 
artery that rises upward from the heart. The veins, like 
numberless small hairs, are rooted in the heart, 
through the heart flows a food finer than the food that 
nourishes the body. 

'East, west, south, north, above, below, every quar- 
ter is filled with His breath. That Self described as 
"not this, not that" cannot be grasped, nor destroyed, 
nor captured, nor afflicted. King, he is imperishable. 
Do not fear.' 

Janaka said: 'You have set me above fear. Here is my 
kingdom; here am I, at your service.' 


147 



Book VII 


Yadnyawalkya went to Janaka. He had not planned a 
discussion; but something said about sacrifice so pleased 
him that he promised Janaka whatever he asked. 
Janaka asked permission to question him; and that was 
the first question he asked. 

Janaka said: 'Ya’dnyawalkya! What is the light of 
man?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: The sun is his light. By that 
light man sits, works, goes, returns,' 

Janaka said: 'When the sun has set what is his light?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: The moon is his light; by that 
light man sits, works, goes, returns,' 

Janaka said: 'When sun and moon have set, what is 
his light?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Fire is his light; by that light 
man sits, works, goes, returns,' 

Janaka said: 'When sun and moon have set, when 
fire is out, what is his light?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Speech is his light; by that light 
man sits, works, goes, returns. When man cannot see 
his own hand, he can hear what is said, and go towards 
the voice.' 

Janaka said: 'When sun and moon have set, when 
fire is out, when nothing is said, what is his light?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'Self is his light; by that light 
man sits, works, goes, returns.' 

148 



Janakasaid: 'Who is that Self?' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'He who lives within the heart, 
surrounded by the senses, He is the light within , know- 
ledge itself. Unchanged He moves through both condi- 
tions, through waking and sleeping; seems to think in 
the one, to sport in the other; plays amid multiform 
dreams, then transcends this world, transcends every 
perishing shape, goes to sleep. 

'He takes abody atbirth, takes up its infirmities; but 
when he leaves that body, He leaves all infirmities. 

'He has in truth two homes, earth and heaven; but 
seems to have a third between, built of dreams. He 
stands in this third home, surveys both heaven and 
earth. While passing on his way to heaven, his nightly 
way, He knows both happiness and misery. He breaks 
the link. He has made dreams through his own power 
and light, he rejects them and goes into dreamless 
sleep. 

'In dreams he shone by his own light; no horse 
there, no road, no carriage, but he made it; no well, 
no tank, no river, but he made it; no excitement, no 
pleasure, no happiness, but he made it. He is the 
maker. 

'Here is my authority: "He breaks the link with all 
that belongs to body; he remains awake giving light; 
dreamless he makes dreams. By that light he returns 
to earth. He is the Golden God, the Man, the Self, 
Hamsa, the solitary Bird." 

'The Golden God, the Man, the Self, Hamsa, the soli- 

149 



tary Bird, He leaves that small nest, the body, in charge 
of its guardian life, goes out wherever He will, is never 
weary. 

'He the God, seems to dream, sporting among 
forms, to go hither and thither, seems to delight in sex, 
to eat and laugh with friends, or to look upon heart- 
rending spectacles. 

' His playing ground is seen; no one can see Him. 

'Some say that dreaming and waking are the same; 
for what man sees while awake, he sees in his dreams. 
Whatever else be true, the Self shines by its own 
light.' 

Janaka said: 'Lord! I give you a thousand crowns. 
Speak on for the sake of my liberation.' 

Yadnyawalkya said: 'He wakes; and having enjoyed, 
gone hither and thither, known good and evil, he 
hastens back again to his dreams. But nothing can 
affect him, nothing can cling to Self. 

'Having enjoyed his dreams, gone hither and thither, 
known good and evil, he hastens back to wakeful- 
ness. But nothing can affect Him, nothing can cling to 
Self. 

'Having enjoyed his wakefulness, gone hither and 
thither, known good and evil, he hastens back again to 
his dreams. 

'As a large fish moves from one bank of a river to the 
other, Self moves between waking and dreaming. 

'But as a falcon or eagle, flying in the sky, wearies, 
folds its wings, falls into its nest, Self hastens into that 

150 



sleep, his last resort, where he desires nothing, creates 
no dream. 

'In this body; there are those veins like numberless 
small hairs called Hita, full of white, blue, yellow, 
green, red. It is because of these that he sees himself 
killed, sees himself beaten down, sees himself chased by 
elephants, sees himself falling into a well; in all these 
dreams, he creates, through ignorance, dangers known 
when awake, or he draws upon imagination, thinking 
himself a king or a god or the world. 

'But his true nature is free from desire, free from 
evil, free from fear. As a man in the embrace of his be- 
loved wife forgets everything that is without, every- 
thing that is within; so man, in the embrace of the 
knowing Self, forgets everything that is without, 
everything that is within; for there all desires are satis- 
fied, Self his sole desire, that is no desire; man goes be- 
yond sorrow. 

'Father disappears, mother disappears, world disap- 
pears, gods disappear, Wedas disappear, thief disap- 
pears, rogue disappears, ascetic disappears, monk dis- 

* 

appears, menial disappears, good and evil disappear; he 
has gone beyond sorrow. 

'What He cannot see, He cannot see, yet He can see; 
sight and He are one, and He is indestructible; what 
can He see; there is nothing separate from Him; no 
second. 

'What He cannot smell, He cannot smell, yet He can 
smell; smelling and He are one, and He is indestruct- 

151 



ible; what can He smell; there is nothing separate from 
Him ; no second. 

'What He cannot taste, He cannot taste, yet He can 
taste; taste and He are one, and He is indestructible; 
what can He taste; there is nothing separate from Him ; 
no second. 

'What He cannot speak, He cannot speak, yet He can 
speak; speech and He are one, and He is indestructible; 
what can He speak; there is nothing separate from 
Him; no second. 

'What He cannot hear, He cannot hear, yet He can 
hear; hearing and He are one, and He is indestructible; 
what can He hear; there is nothing separate from Him; 
no second. 

'What He cannot think, He cannot think, yet He can 
think; thinking and He are one, and He is indestruct- 
ible; whatcan He think; there is nothing separate from 
Him ; no second. 

'What He cannot touch, He cannot touch, yet He can 
touch; touching and He are one, and He is indestruct- 
ible; whatcan He touch; there is nothing separate from 
Him ; no second. 

'What He cannot know, He cannot know, yet He can 
know; knowing and He are one, and He is indestruct- 
ible; what can He kno w ; there is nothing separate from 
Him; no second. 

'Where there is another, one sees another; smells, 
tastes, touches, knows, hears another, speaks to another, 
thinks of another, 


152 



'One, without a second; that is the Kingdom of 
Heaven; man's highest achievement; his greatest 
wealth; his final goal; his utmost joy. Other creatures 
must live on a diminution of this joy, 

' When the knowing Self masters the personal self at 
death, the personal self groans, as a heavily laden cart 
grtfans under its burden. 

'When body grows weak through age or disease, the 
Self separates itself from the limbs, as a mango, a fig, 
a banyan fruit separates itself from the stalk; man 
hastens back to birth, goes, as before, from birth to 
birth. 

'As soldiers, governors, scholars, leaders, wait upon a 
returning king with food and drink and bring him to 
his house announcing his approach, so all the elements 
wait upon such a Self, announcing its approach. 

'As soldiers, governors, scholars, leaders, gather to- 
gether to bid goodbye to a king, so when the Self de- 
cides to go, all the senses gather.' 

'As a caterpillar, having reached the end of a blade of 
grass, takes hold of another blade, 'then draws its body 
from the first, so the Self having reached the end of his 
body, takes hold of another body, then draws itself from 
the first. 

'And as a goldsmith takes the gold from an old piece 
of jewelry and shapes it into a more modern piece, so 
the Self forgets the old body, takes hold of another 
body, whether like that of the fathers, or of the celestial 

153 



singers, or of the gods, or of the begetter, or of any other 
creature. 

'This Self is Spirit. He is knowledge, mind, life, 
sight, hearing, earth, water, wind, air, light ; dark- 
ness, desire, absence of desire, anger, placability, right, 
wrong; He is everything; He is this and that. Whatever 
his conduct and character in one life, he has it in his 
next; if good in one, he is good in another; if a sinner in 
one, he is a sinner in another; his good karma makes 
him good, his sinful karma makes him sinful. Hence 
they say that soul is full of desire. He wills according to 
his desire; he acts according to his will; he reaps what 
he sows. Here is my authority: 

1 "Self goes where man's mind goes. Whatever his 
actions in this world, he enjoys their reward in the 
next; that over, he returns for action's sake. I speak of a 
man with desire; but what is he who has no desire? He 
has no desire, because he has attained his desire; desire 
of Self is no desire. He does not die like others; he is of 
Spirit, he becomes Spirit." 

'When all desires of the heart are gone, mortal be- 
comes immortal, man becomes Spirit, even in this life. 

'As the skin of a snake is peeled off and lies dead on 
an ant-hill, so this body falls and lies on the ground; but 
the Self is bodiless, immortal, full of light; he is of 
Spirit, he becomes Spirit. 

'If man knows that he is He, why should he hunger 
for a body? 

'He, whose Self lying in this mysterious uncertain 

154 



body is awakened, becomes Spirit. He becomes the 
maker of the world, the maker of everything. His is the 
world, he is the' world itself. 

'Let the wise and holy man know Him, govern his 
intellect by that knowledge} not learn words after 
words, a weariness to the tongue. 

Holding this purpose, people long ago did not want 
children. Spirit was their goal; what had they to do 
with children? They refused children, wealth, com- 
pany, travelled with a begging bowl. Desire for chil- 
dren is desire for wealth, desire for wealth is desire for 
company ; what is desire but desire?' 


Book VIII 

Shwetaketu went to the assembly of the wise men of 
Panchala, and found king Prawahana Jaiwali, sur- 
rounded by courtiers. The king saw him and said: W e 1 - 
come, young man!' 

'Here I am, Your Majesty,' said Shwetaketu. 

The king said: 'Have you been taught by your 
father?' 

Shwetaketu said: 'Yes!' 

The king said: 'Do you know if people go in different 
directions when they die?' 

'No!' 

'Do you know how they come back again to this 
world?' 

"No!' 


155 



'Do you know why the other world is not overcrowded 
by those who are pouring in?' 

'No!' 

'Do you know when water takes the form of man 
and begins to speak?' 

'No!' 

'Do you know where to find the road that leads to 
God and the road that leads to the fathers? Have you 
not heard these words of the Sage: "I have heard of the 
roads by which men travel, one that leads to God, one 
that leads to the fathers. Everything that moves be- 
tween heaven and earth, moves along these roads!"' 

Shwetaketu said: 'I have not heard of either road.' 

Then the king offered him bed and board but the 
young man refused, went back to his father and said: 
'Father! Why did you call me well educated?' 

Father said: 'Wise man! what is the matter?' 

Son said: 'That king asked me five questions, and I 
did not know how to answer one of them.' 

Father said: 'What were they?' 

Son said: 'They were these,' and told him the five 
questions. 

Father said: 'My son! Whatever I knew, I taught 
you. But come, we go to the king and become his 
pupils.' 

Son said: 'You can go alone.' 

Thereupon Gautama went to the king, who gave 
him a seat, water and a welcome, saying: ' 1 will give 
whatever you ask.' 


156 



Gautama said: 'Say what you said to my son.' 

King said: 'Why ask for a spiritual gift; why not ask 
a more substantial gift?' 

Gautama said: 'You know well that I do not lack 
gold, cows, horses, servants, attendants, clothes. Do not 
offer me what I have already in great abundance.' 

Kingsaid: 'Gautama! Thenaskintheproperway.' 

Gautama said: 'I come as a pupil. There was a time 
when people gave their word, and were accepted as 
pupils.' 

Gautama was accepted and stayed as a pupil. 

King said: 'Gautama! As your forefathers were not 
offended with my forefathers, do not be offended with 
me. I give what you have asked; for who can refuse 
when asked, as you have asked? 

'This knowledge is not born even in a priest. 

'Gautama! Heaven is the sacrificial fire, sun its fuel, 
rays its smoke, day its flame, quarters its coal, sub- 
quarters its sparks. Gods offer faith as an oblation and 
create king moon. 

'Rain-cloud is the sacrificial fire, year its fuel, vapour 
its smoke, lightning its flame, thunderbolt its coal, 
thunder its spark. Gods offer king moon as an oblation 
and create the rain. 

'World is the sacrificial fire, earth its fuel, fire its 
smoke, night its flame, moon its coal, stars its sparks. 
Gods offer rain as an oblation and create food. 

'Man is the sacrificial fire, open mouth its fuel, 
breath its smoke, tongue its flame, eyes its coal, ears 

157 



its sparks. Gods offer food as an oblation and create 
seed. 

'Woman is the sacrificial fire. Gods offer seed as an 
oblation and create man. He lives as long as he may 
and dies. 

'Then they burn him on the funeral pile. There fire 
is the sacrificial fire, fuel is fuel, smoke is smoke, flame 
is flame, coal is coal, spark is spark. Gods offer man as an 
oblation and create a being blazing with light. 

'Householders who know and worship sacrificial fire; 
ascetics who know it in solitude, and worship it as faith 
and truth; pass after death into light, from light into 
day, from day into the moon's brightning fortnight, 
from the moon's brightning fortnight into the six 
months when sun moves northward, from these 
months into the territory of gods, from the territory 
of gods into the sun, from the sun into lightning. The 
self-born Spirit finds them there and leads them to 
heaven. In that Kingdom of Heaven they live, never 
returning to earth. 

'But they who conquer the lesser worlds by sacrifice, 
austerity, alms-giving, pass into smoke, from smoke into 
night, from night into the six months when the sun 
travels southward, from these months into the world 
of fathers, from the world of fathers into the moon, 
where they become food. As priests feed on the moon, 
so gods feed on them. When their karma is exhausted, 
they return to air, from air to wind, from wind to rain, 
from rain into the earth where they become food, where 

158 



they are offered as sacrifice to the fire in man; offered as 
sacrifice to the fire in woman; then they are born again. 
Once more they rise, once more they circie round. 

'Those who do not know any of these roads, are born 
as poisonous worms and insects.' 

This is perfect. That is perfect. Perfect comes from 
perfect. Take perfect from perfect; the remainder is 
perfect. 

May peace and peace and peace be everywhere. 


The End